TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS




TABLE OF CONTENTS
           MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY .................................................................................................... 1
           ABOUT THE AGENCY FINANCIAL REPORT ........................................................................................ 2
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS ...................................................................................... 3
           ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES ..................................................... 4
           PERFORMANCE GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND RESULTS ........................................................................ 8
           ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND STEWARDSHIP INFORMATION ................................ 19
           SYSTEMS, LEGAL COMPLIANCE AND INTERNAL CONTROLS .......................................................... 28
           STATEMENT OF ASSURANCE .......................................................................................................... 34
           SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL STATEMENT AUDIT .............................................................................. 37
           SUMMARY OF MANAGEMENT ASSURANCES ................................................................................ 38
           LOOKING AHEAD TO 2014 ............................................................................................................. 39
FINANCIAL SECTION ........................................................................................................................... 41
           MESSAGE FROM THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER .......................................................................... 42
           REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS .................................................................................... 43
           DEPARTMENT’S RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS........................... 71
           PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.............................................................................................. 72
           NOTES TO THE PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ..................................................................... 81
           REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY STEWARDSHIP INFORMATION ...................................................... 125
           REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION .............................................................................. 128
OTHER INFORMATION ..................................................................................................................... 149
           OTHER FINANCIAL INFORMATION ............................................................................................... 150
           IMPROPER PAYMENTS INFORMATION ACT REPORT ................................................................... 156
           MANAGEMENT REPORT ON FINAL ACTION ................................................................................. 192
           FY 2013 TOP MANAGEMENT AND PERFORMANCE CHALLENGES IDENTIFIED BY OFFICE OF
           INSPECTOR GENERAL (OIG).......................................................................................................... 195
           DEPARTMENT’S RESPONSE TO OIG TOP MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES ...................................... 222
           GLOSSARY .................................................................................................................................... 223
           LAWS, REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE ........................................................................................ 228




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report
                                                                                         MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY




                                      MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY

                              I am pleased to present the FY 2013 Agency Financial Report for the Department of
                              Health and Human Services.

                              Our Department’s mission is to improve the health and well-being of all Americans
                              through effective health and human services and by fostering sound, sustained
                              advances in care, research, public health, and social services.

                              We manage one of the largest budgets in the world and improve the health and lives of
                              Americans every day. We administer more grant dollars than all other federal agencies
                              combined. Our initiatives are as diverse as the people whom we serve. It is our
                              obligation to make the investments that will reach the most people, build most
  Kathleen Sebelius           effectively on our partners’ efforts, and lead to the biggest gains in health and
                              opportunity for the American people.

One of our most notable initiatives is our work to implement the Affordable Care Act. Today, health care cost
growth has been driven down to the lowest levels in 50 years, and millions of Americans are already benefitting
from new rights and consumer protections. With the new Health Insurance Marketplace, choice and competition
among private market plans is now available to millions of uninsured and underinsured Americans. We are
committed to improving the consumer experience with the Marketplace and our work will not be done until every
eligible American has the opportunity to access affordable, quality health coverage.

As Secretary of HHS, I recognize that we are accountable, above all, to the American public. Our departmental
financial statement audit is one of the best tools the American people have to assess our financial information.
This year, we obtained a clean opinion on our Consolidated Balance Sheet, Statement of Net Cost, Statement of
Changes in Net Position, and the Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources. The auditors did not audit nor
express an opinion on the FY 2013 Statement of Social Insurance and Statement of Changes in Social Insurance
Amounts that reflect current law as presented in the 2013 Medicare Trustees Report.

As required by the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA) and the Office of Management and
Budget’s Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control, we also evaluated our internal controls
and financial management systems. We found one material weakness in the Department related to Information
Systems Controls and Security and one material noncompliance with the Improper Payments Information Act
related to error rate measurement. We have already begun taking actions to improve our financial reports and
systems. Further details may be found in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of our report.

None of our accomplishments would be possible without the dedication and commitment of our employees and
the strong support of our state, local, and nonprofit partners. I am proud of the work we do and the progress we
have made. We are delivering on our promise of providing better care, helping Americans achieve better health,
and lowering the costs of health care for all Americans.

/Kathleen Sebelius/
Kathleen Sebelius
Secretary
December 16, 2013




Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 1
                                                                                       ABOUT THE AGENCY FINANCIAL REPORT




                                ABOUT THE AGENCY FINANCIAL REPORT
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS or the Department) Fiscal Year (FY) 2013 Agency Financial
Report (AFR) provides fiscal and summary performance results that enable the President, Congress and the
American people to assess our accomplishments for the reporting period beginning October 1, 2012 and ending
September 30, 2013. Challenges and accomplishments arising after September 30, 2013 will be addressed in the FY
2014 AFR. This report provides an overview of our programs, accomplishments, challenges and management’s
accountability for the resources entrusted to us. We have prepared this report in accordance with the
requirements of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-136, Financial Reporting Requirements.
This document consists of three primary sections:

                  Management’s Discussion and Analysis
                  The Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) section provides an overview of the entire report.
                  Specifically, the MD&A presents an overview of performance and financial highlights for FY 2013. It also
                  discusses HHS’ compliance with legal and regulatory requirements, a summary of audit and
                  management assurances and gives a brief look ahead to FY 2014.

                  Financial Section
                  The Financial Section includes the Department’s Principal Financial Statements and the Report of
                  the Independent Auditors. It also contains the Notes to the Principal Financial Statements,
                  Required Supplementary Stewardship Information (RSSI) and Required Supplementary
                  Information (RSI).

                  Other Information
                  The Other Information (OI) section contains additional financial information including the
                  Schedule of Spending, the Office of Inspector General’s (OIG) FY 2013 assessment of management
                  challenges facing the Department, a Management Report on Final Action and the Improper
                  Payments Information Act Report, as well as a glossary and legal regulations relevant to this AFR.

Agency Financial Report Availability
We present our FY 2013 AFR, which conforms to OMB Circular A-136, Financial Reporting Requirements. The FY
2013 AFR will be available December 16 and the FY 2014 Congressional Budget Justification will be available in
February 2014, as will the Summary of Performance and Financial Information. These reports will be available on
our website at http://www.hhs.gov at that time. This suite of reports provides readers and decision-makers with
enhanced and more transparent financial and performance information.

We Welcome Your Comments
Thank you for your interest in the Department of Health and Human Services. The FY 2013 AFR is available at
http://www.hhs.gov. We welcome your comments and questions regarding this AFR and appreciate any
suggestions. Please contact us at hhsdeputycfo@hhs.gov or at:

                                          Department of Health and Human Services
                                          Office of Finance/OFPR
                                          Mail Stop 522D
                                          200 Independence Avenue, S.W.
                                          Washington, DC 20201




Department of Health and Human Services                                                    FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 2
                                                           ABOUT THE AGENCY FINANCIAL REPORT




                            MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




Department of Health and Human Services                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 3
                                                                                  MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




               ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
HHS is the United States (U.S.) Government’s principal agency for protecting the health of all Americans and
providing essential human services, especially for those who are least able to help themselves.
                                      HHS represents almost a quarter of all federal outlays and administers more
                                      grant dollars than all other federal agencies combined. As the nation’s largest
  Mission Statement                   health insurer, HHS’ Medicare program handles more than one billion claims
                                      per year. Medicare and Medicaid together provide health care insurance for
                                      one in four Americans.
  Our mission is to
  enhance the health and              HHS works closely with state and local governments and many HHS-funded
                                      services are provided at the local level by state or county agencies, or through
  well-being of
                                      private sector grantees. The HHS Office of the Secretary (OS) and its eleven
  Americans by providing
                                      operating divisions (OPDIVs) administer more than 300 programs, covering a
  for effective health and
                                      wide spectrum of activities. In addition to the services they deliver, HHS
  human services, and by
                                      programs provide for equitable treatment of beneficiaries nationwide and
  fostering sound,
                                      enable the collection of national health and other data.
  sustained advances in
  the sciences, underlying            Our vision is to provide the building blocks that Americans need to live healthy,
  medicine, public health,            successful lives. We fulfill our mission and vision daily by providing millions of
  and social services.                children, families and seniors with access to high-quality health care, helping
                                      people find jobs, assisting parents to find affordable childcare, keeping the food
                                      on Americans’ shelves safe and pushing the boundaries of how we diagnose and
                                      treat disease. Each HHS OPDIV contributes to our mission and vision as follows:

The Administration for Children and Families (ACF) is responsible for federal programs that promote the
economic and social well-being of families, children, individuals and communities. For more information, please
visit: http://www.acf.hhs.gov.

The Administration for Community Living (ACL) is responsible for
providing national leadership and direction to plan, manage, develop and
raise awareness of comprehensive and coordinated systems of long-term
services and support that enable older Americans and individuals with
disabilities to maintain their health and independence in their homes and
communities. For more information, please visit: http://www.hhs.gov/acl.

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) improves the
quality, safety, efficiency and effectiveness of health care for all              ACL serves as the Federal agency
Americans. AHRQ fulfills this mission by conducting health services               responsible for increasing access to
                                                                                  community supports, while focusing
research in order to identify the most effective ways to organize, manage,
                                                                                  attention and resources on the unique
finance, deliver high-quality health care, reduce medical errors and              needs of older Americans and people
improve patient safety. For more information, please visit:                       with disabilities across the lifespan.
http://www.ahrq.gov.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                   FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 4
                                                                                 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
(ATSDR) serves the public by using the best science,
taking responsive public health actions and providing
trusted health information to prevent harmful
exposures or disease-related exposures to toxic
substances. For more information, please visit:
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
                                                               The Norton Sound Regional Hospital in Nome, Alaska
administers public insurance programs which serve as
                                                               operates under the umbrella of the Indian Health Service.
the primary sources of health care coverage for seniors
and a large population of medically vulnerable individuals and acts as a catalyst for enormous changes in the
availability and quality of health care for all Americans. In addition to these programs, CMS has the responsibility
to ensure effective, up-to-date health care coverage and to promote quality care for beneficiaries. CMS also is
responsible for helping to implement many provisions of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). For more information,
please visit: http://www.cms.gov.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) collaborates to create the expertise, information and tools
that people and communities need to protect their health – through health promotion; prevention of disease,
injury and disability; and preparedness for new health threats. For more information, please visit:
http://www.cdc.gov.

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for protecting
the public health by assuring the safety, efficacy and security of human
and veterinary drugs, biological products, medical devices, our nation’s
food supply, cosmetics and products that emit radiation. FDA is also
responsible for advancing the public health by helping to speed
innovations that make medicines and foods effective, affordable and
safe. Additionally, it helps the public get the most accurate, science-
                                                                               An FDA field inspector checks imported
based information it needs to use medicines and foods to improve its           food for contaminants and prepares
health. For more information, please visit: http://www.fda.gov.                samples for laboratory analysis.


The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) is responsible for improving health care and achieving
health care equity through access to quality services, a skilled health workforce and innovative programs. HRSA
focuses on uninsured, underserved and special needs populations in its goals and program activities. For more
information, please visit: http://www.hrsa.gov.

The Indian Health Service (IHS) is responsible for providing federal health services to American Indians and Alaska
                                        Natives. The provision of health services to members of federally
                                        recognized tribes grew out of the special government-to-government
                                        relationship between the Federal Government and Indian tribes. This
                                        relationship, established in 1787, is based on Article I, Section 8, of the U.S.
                                        Constitution and has been given form and substance by numerous treaties,
                                        laws, Supreme Court decisions and Executive Orders. IHS is the principal
                                        federal health care provider and health advocate for Indian people, with
                                        the goal of raising Indian health status to the highest possible level. The IHS




Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 5
                                                                              MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



provides a comprehensive health service delivery system for approximately 2.2 million American Indians and
Alaska Natives who belong to 566 federally recognized tribes in 35 states. For more information, please visit:
http://www.ihs.gov.

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is the steward of medical and
behavioral research for the nation. NIH promotes science in pursuit of
fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living
systems. It also utilizes the application of that knowledge to extend
healthy life and reduce the burdens of illness and disability. For more
information, please visit: http://www.nih.gov.

The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) is responsible for reducing the impact of substance abuse
and mental illness on America’s communities. SAMHSA accomplishes
its mission by providing leadership, developing service capacity,
communicating with the public, setting standards and improving            NIH scientists prepare equipment          for
practice in communities, primary and specialty care settings. For         research at the National Eye Institute.
more information, please visit: http://www.samhsa.gov.

The Office of the Secretary (OS), with our Secretary, leads HHS and its eleven OPDIVs, listed above, to provide a
wide range of services and benefits to the American people. In addition, the following staff divisions (STAFFDIVs)
report directly to the Secretary, managing programs and supporting the OPDIVs in carrying out our mission. They
are:

•   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) http://www.hhs.gov/asa/

•   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources (ASFR) http://www.hhs.gov/asfr/

•   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH) http://www.hhs.gov/ash/

•   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Legislation (ASL) http://www.hhs.gov/asl/

•   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) http://www.aspe.hhs.gov/

•   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs (ASPA) http://www.hhs.gov/aspa/

•   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) http://www.phe.gov/preparedness/

•   Center for Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships (CFBNP) http://www.hhs.gov/partnerships/

•   Departmental Appeals Board (DAB) http://www.hhs.gov/dab/

•   Office for Civil Rights (OCR) http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/

•   Office of the General Counsel (OGC) http://www.hhs.gov/ogc/

•   Office of Global Affairs (OGA) http://www.globalhealth.gov/

•   Office of Inspector General (OIG) http://www.oig.hhs.gov/

•   Office of Intergovernmental and External Affairs (IEA) http://www.hhs.gov/intergovernmental/

•   Office of Medicare Hearings and Appeals (OMHA) http://www.hhs.gov/omha/

•   Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) http://www.healthit.hhs.gov/




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 6
                                                                        MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Below, we present our organizational chart, which consists of the Office of the Secretary
http://www.hhs.gov/secretary/ and the noted STAFFDIVs and OPDIVs. To find further information regarding our
organization, components and programs, visit our website at http://www.hhs.gov.




Department of Health and Human Services                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 7
                                                                                MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




                        PERFORMANCE GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND RESULTS
Health and Human Services Performance Results

                                     Throughout FY 2013, HHS continued to improve its performance management
                                     processes in alignment with the Government Performance and Results
                                     Modernization Act. This activity supports HHS’ mission to enhance the health and
                                     well-being of Americans. HHS’ performance management efforts during this
                                     period have reinforced progress while finding new efficiencies.
  Scientists at NIH


Performance Management Process Milestones

In FY 2013, HHS ensured the prominence of program performance to support the Department’s mission of
protecting the health of all Americans and providing essential human services, especially for those who are least
able to help themselves. These efforts are shown through the successes of the HHS Priority Goals and the
innovative and results-oriented solutions developed and delivered throughout the Department. Furthermore, the
alignment of Department activities to the HHS Strategic Plan provides the framework to simultaneously address
current    issues   and      prepare    to   meet    future     challenges.    This    Plan    is  available   at
http://www.hhs.gov/secretary/about/priorities/priorities.html and outlines five Strategic Goals:

  1. Strengthen health care
  2. Advance scientific knowledge and innovation
  3. Advance the health, safety and well-being of the American people
  4. Increase efficiency, transparency and accountability of HHS programs
  5. Strengthen the nation’s HHS infrastructure and workforce

With collaboration from stakeholders throughout the Department, HHS
has continued to pursue six Priority Goals for FY 2012-2013. These efforts
have supported significant improvements in near-term outcomes and
advanced progress toward longer-term, outcome-focused strategic
objectives. These goals include efforts to:

  • Increase the number of health centers certified as Patient Centered
    Medical Homes                                                                An FDA shellfish specialist (left) and a
  • Improve patient safety                                                       New Jersey state inspector look at a
  • Improve health care through meaningful use of Health Information             map of the waters where clams were
                                                                                 harvested. The risks associated with
    Technology                                                                   eating raw or partially cooked
  • Improve the quality of early childhood education                             shellfish are often related to the
  • Reduce cigarette smoking                                                     quality of water from which they are
                                                                                 harvested.
  • Reduce food-borne illness in the population

The performance results reported in the AFR represent key measures and performance highlights demonstrating
progress toward each HHS Strategic Goal. Additional performance measures and trends are available in the FY
2014 HHS Annual Performance Plan and Report which was published in April 2013 and is located at
www.hhs.gov/budget/fy2014/opa_040513.pdf. Detailed FY 2013 performance results will be available in February


Department of Health and Human Services                                                 FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 8
                                                                                MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



2014 in the HHS FY 2015 Annual Performance Report (APR) and the FY 2015 Congressional Budget Justification.
These reports can be located at www.hhs.gov upon approval and issuance. A synopsis of FY 2013 performance
information will also be contained in the FY 2014 Summary of Performance and Financial Information.

The accomplishments and performance trends below, including progress
on HHS Priority Goals, underscore HHS’ dedication to sustained
performance improvement and emphasis on working to meet the
Departments’ five Strategic Goals. Targets presented within the tables
represent performance expectations based on a number of factors and
may not exceed the previous years’ results, although they may represent
an improvement over previous years' targets. The results displayed in
bold within each Strategic Goal indicate targets that were met or
exceeded for the applicable period. Some results were not available at
the time of this report due to data collection requirements. The target is     A CDC researcher inspects equipment.
displayed to show planned progress, with results expected in FY 2014.

Strategic Goal One: Strengthen Health Care

 HHS continues to drive the effort to strengthen and modernize health care to improve patient outcomes. Through
its programs, HHS also promotes efficiency and accountability, ensures patient safety, encourages shared
responsibility and works toward high-value health care. In addition to addressing these responsibilities, HHS is
improving access to culturally competent, quality health care for uninsured, underserved and vulnerable
populations.

HHS’ efforts in patient safety as well as health care quality are reflected in Improve Patient Safety Priority Goal, in
order to reduce Healthcare-Associated Infections (HAIs). These infections can lead to significant morbidity and
mortality, with tens of thousands of lives lost each year. Of these hospital-acquired events, central line-associated
bloodstream infections (CLABSI) have a strong potential to cause serious illness or death and catheter-associated
urinary tract infections (CAUTI) are among the most common, and reduction of these two HAIs in hospitals is the
target of the Priority Goal.

                                             Leveraging the combined programmatic efforts within HHS, including
                                             AHRQ, CDC, CMS and OASH, the Improve Patient Safety Priority Goal
                                             worked to reduce CLABSI by 25 percent and CAUTI by 20 percent in
                                             hospitals nationwide by the end of FY 2013. This is measured over the FY
                                             2010 Standardized Infection Ratios (SIRs) of 0.68 and 0.94, respectively
                                             (SIR is calculated by dividing the actual (observed) infections by the
                                             expected infections using data gathered through the CDC National
                                             Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN)). As of August 2013, NHSN has over
  Indiana University–Purdue University       12,000 health care facilities participating for local quality improvement
  Fort Wayne received a grant that will
                                             and the success of this capacity building effort to measure quality of
  help better prepare its nursing students
  for the rapid changes in today’s health    care more effectively has had the intended effect of supporting a whole
  care industry.                             host of quality improvement initiatives, including this priority goal.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                 FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 9
                                                                                                 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



HHS program efforts that help health care partners achieve these goals include
the AHRQ’s Comprehensive Unit-based Safety Program (CUSP), CDC’s
development and maintenance of NHSN, CMS’ Quality Improvement
Organizations (QIO) and Partnership for Patients initiative and strategic
direction and support from OASH, including the National Action Plan to
Prevent HAIs.

The FY 2013 Q2 CLABSI NHSN data was calculated at 0.55 SIR, or a 19 percent
reduction in the SIR over the baseline of 0.68, significantly contributing to
reduced central line-associated bloodstream infections, which saves lives and
provides better patient outcomes. The FY 2013 Q2 CAUTI NHSN data was
calculated at 1.02 SIR or a 9 percent increase in the SIR over the baseline of
0.94. The plan is to focus on efforts to continue and sustain the successes seen
in CLABSI reduction while intensifying work to improve progress toward
reducing CAUTIs through maximizing collaboration, ensuring accuracy in
reporting, and identifying regional focus area through data.



                                         Standardized Infection Ratio of Hospital-Acquired Infection
                                                 HHS Priority Goal- Improve Patient Safety
                                                             (* result exceeded target)


                     1.60

                     1.40

                     1.20                                          1.06
                                  0.94                                                    1.02
                                                  0.95
                     1.00                                                                                                 CLABSI (SIR)
   Infection Ratio
    Standardized




                                                                                                  0.75 (Target)
                     0.80                                                                                                 CAUTI (SIR)

                     0.60
                                  0.68
                                                  0.56*            0.57*                  0.55
                     0.40                                                                         0.51 (Target)

                     0.20

                       -
                            Baseline FY 2010   FY 2012 2nd     FY 2012 4th        FY 2013 2nd     FY 2013 4th
                                                 Quarter         Quarter            Quarter         Quarter
                                                                                                    (Target)




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 10
                                                                                     MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



The Patient Centered Medical Home (PCMH) Initiative was established to enhance the quality of care in health
centers and support health center efforts to achieve national PCMH certification under the medical home
program. As of Q4 of FY 2013, 978 health center grantees have initiated certification surveys (far exceeding the
FY13 target of 460) demonstrating their desire to participate in the program’s service delivery model designed to
improve the quality of care through enhanced access, planning, management, and monitoring of patient care.
Most importantly, 33 percent of health centers now have at least one site recognized as a PCMH also exceeding
the quarterly target.

                       Percentage of Health Centers with at least One Site Recognized as a PCMH
                      HHS Priority Goal- Increase the Number of Health Centers Certified as PCMH
                                                  (* result exceeded target)

                                                                                                                    33%*
                                                                                                    24%*
                                                                     20%*           21%*

                                      11%*          13%*
                        8%*
        4%*


     FY 2012 1st    FY 2012 2nd    FY 2012 3rd   FY 2012 4th      FY 2013 1st    FY 2013 2nd     FY 2013 3rd     FY 2013 4th
       Quarter        Quarter        Quarter       Quarter          Quarter        Quarter         Quarter         Quarter


                                          Using data to improve health care quality, reduce unnecessary health
                                          care costs, decrease paperwork, expand access to affordable care,
                                          improve population health, and support reformed payment structures is
                                          critical to HHS’s strategy to strengthen and modernize health care. This
                                          focus on utilizing data is also facilitating new means of improving the
                                          quality, efficiency, and patient-centeredness of care. A key step in this
                                          strategy is to provide incentive payments to eligible providers serving
   Toxicology Research at FDA             Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries who adopt and meaningfully use
                                          certified electronic health records (EHR) technology. Progress on this
step has exceeded expectations as the annual goal of 230,000 providers was met in Q2 and has been exceeded by
over 90,000 providers as of Q4. Concurrently, IHS tracking of Meaningful Use payments indicates that, as of July
2013, 1,819 eligible providers from IHS, tribal, and urban Indian health programs have registered with CMS, and
931 eligible providers have received CMS EHR incentive payments contributing to health care modernization.

                       Number of Eligible Providers who Receive an Incentive Payment from
                     CMS Medicare and Medicaid Electronic Health Records Incentive Programs
         HHS Priority Goal- Improve Health Care through Meaningful Use of Health Information Technology
                                                  (* result exceeded target)


                                                                                                309,802*        325,124*
                                                                                 259,630*
                                                                  190,107
                                                  156,758*
                                    122,818*
                       76,739
        32,498


     FY 2012 1st    FY 2012 2nd    FY 2012 3rd   FY 2012 4th     FY 2013 1st    FY 2013 2nd    FY 2013 3rd     FY 2013 4th
       Quarter        Quarter        Quarter       Quarter         Quarter        Quarter        Quarter         Quarter




Department of Health and Human Services                                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 11
                                                                                MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Strategic Goal Two: Advance Scientific Knowledge and Innovation

HHS is expanding its scientific understanding of how best to advance health care, public health, human services,
biomedical research, and to ensure the availability of safe medical and food products. Chief among these efforts is
the identification, implementation, and rigorous evaluation of new approaches in science, health care, public
health, and human services that encourage efficiency, effectiveness, sustainability and sharing or translating that
knowledge into better products and services.

The Guide to Community Preventive Services is a compilation of the recommendations from the nonfederal,
independent Community Preventive Services Task Force (Task Force) and the systematic reviews on which the
recommendations are based. Task Force recommendations provide evidence-based options for programs, services,
and policies from which decision makers, practitioners, and researchers can choose those that best meet the
needs, preferences, available resources, and constraints of their constituents. To achieve their maximum health
impact, Task Force recommendations must be disseminated, adopted, and used. Fiscal year trends through August
2013 show increased page views above FY 2012 levels. These results serve as a proxy measure indicating increased
awareness and use of the Community Guide.

                        Number of Page Views of the "Guide to Community Preventive Services"
                                                (* result exceeded target)



             FY 2011                                                          927,357



             FY 2012                                                                             1,220,956*



             FY 2013
                                                                                    1,032,147
             (Target)




NIH’s Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) program provides data on
how human DNA variation correlates with variation in gene expression
levels, which strengthens the power of genome-wide association
studies to identify potential new gene targets for therapies. Following
an initial two-year pilot, GTEx underwent an expansion in FY 2013 to
build a comprehensive data and sample resource of genetic variation
and gene expression profiles in multiple tissues. The GTEx program has
been highly successful in procuring samples, extracting high-quality
RNA from tissues, and obtaining data from gene expression array and
RNA sequencing experiments. Additionally, data and biospecimens              Cultured HeLa cells counterstained for
made available to the research community to support additional               DNA (cyan).

molecular analyses of GTEx samples have added scientific value to the
resource as a whole.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                 FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 12
                                                                                          MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Strategic Goal Three: Advance the Health, Safety and Well-Being of the American People

HHS is striving to promote the health, economic and social well-being
of children, people with disabilities, and older adults while improving
wellness for all. To meet this goal, the Department is employing
evidence-based strategies to strengthen families and to improve
outcomes for children, adults, and communities. Underlying each
objective and strategy associated with this goal is a focus on
prevention.

The Improve Quality of Early Childhood Education Priority Goal calls
for actions to improve the quality of programs for low-income             Secretary of Health and Human Services,
children. For the child care program, the aim is to increase the          Kathleen Sebelius, met with students at
                                                                          Lowry Elementary School in Denver, CO.
number of states with Quality Rating and Improvement Systems
(QRIS) that meet the seven high-quality benchmarks for child care and other early childhood programs developed
by the HHS, in coordination with the Department of Education. QRIS is a mechanism by which to improve the
quality of child care available in communities and increase parents’ knowledge and understanding of the child care
options available to them. Through technical assistance and other support from ACF, an additional seven states
have demonstrated significant progress by meeting at least six (of the seven) quality benchmarks toward the
overall target of 25 states shown below.


              Number of States Implementing QRIS that are Meeting the QRIS High-Quality Benchmarks
                            HHS Priority Goal- Improve the Quality of Early Childhood Education

                        FY 2011                                                17

                        FY 2012                                                      19

                        FY 2013
                                                                                                    25
                        (Target)



Smoking, and secondhand smoke, kills an estimated 443,000 people in the United States each year. For every
smoker who dies from a smoking-attributable disease, another 20 live with a serious smoking-related disease.
Smoking costs the U.S. $96 billion in medical costs and $97 billion in lost productivity each year. While smoking
among adults in the United States is down significantly from a decade ago, the decline in adult smoking rates has
slowed, concurrent with reductions in state investments in tobacco control programs. However, the coordinated
efforts of this Priority Goal have continued reductions in adult cigarette consumption based on FY 2012 results
(reported in June 2013).
                        Annual Per Capita Cigarette Consumption by Adults in the United States
                                    HHS Priority Goal- Reduce Cigarette Smoking
                                                  (* result exceeded target)

         1,695          1,591             1,507     1,367           1,281           1,232*          1,196          1,062




        FY 2006        FY 2007        FY 2008     FY 2009          FY 2010          FY 2011        FY 2012        FY 2013
                                                                                                                  (Target)


Department of Health and Human Services                                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 13
                                                                                      MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




Salmonella is the leading known cause of bacterial foodborne illness and
death in the United States. Salmonella serotype enteritidis (SE), a subtype of
Salmonella, is now the most common type of salmonella in the United
States and accounts for approximately 20 percent of all salmonella cases in
humans. The most significant sources of foodborne SE infections are shell
eggs (FDA-regulated) and broiler chickens (USDA-regulated). Therefore,
reducing SE illness from shell eggs is the most appropriate FDA strategy for
reducing illness from SE. Preventing salmonella infections depends on
actions taken by regulatory agencies, the food industry and consumers to
reduce contamination of food, as well as actions taken for detecting and responding to outbreaks. CDC, as part of a
shared vision to reduce foodborne illness, is working to improve data to better estimate sources of illness. Efforts
throughout FY 2013 have produced a reduction in the SE rate each quarter through 3rd Quarter.

                                   Rate of Salmonella Enteritidis Illness in the Population
                                HHS Priority Goal- Reduce Food-Borne Illness in the Population

        3.02             3.06             3.03
                                                      2.74             2.61         2.47             2.32              2.10




    FY 2012 1st     FY 2012 2nd      FY 2012 3rd   FY 2012 4th     FY 2013 1st   FY 2013 2nd     FY 2013 3rd     FY 2013 4th
      Quarter         Quarter          Quarter       Quarter         Quarter       Quarter         Quarter         Quarter
                                                                                                                   (Target)



One of the goals of SAMHSA’s Strategic Initiative on Recovery Support is to ensure that permanent housing and
supportive services are available for individuals with mental and substance use disorders. A way to meet this goal
is to ensure that the most vulnerable individuals who experience chronic homelessness receive access to
sustainable permanent housing, treatment, and recovery supports through grant funds and mainstream funding
sources. A measure of the effectiveness of this effort is to determine overall health status, both physical and
emotional mental health, from the consumer’s perception of his or her recent functioning. Questions are asked
specifically about how the consumer was able to deal with everyday life and how frequently the consumer
experienced psychological distress within the past 30 days. Following the initial 13 percent increase from FY 2008
to FY 2009, the percentage has been maintained over 60 percent since, and FY 2013 progress supports continued
sustained performance.
 Percentage of Adults Receiving Homeless Support Services who Report Positive Functioning at 6 Month Follow-up
                                                    (* result exceeded target)

                                  66.0%*           62.3%               67.4%*           66.7%               63.1%
               53.3%




               FY 2008            FY 2009          FY 2010             FY 2011         FY 2012              FY 2013
                                                                                                            (Target)




Department of Health and Human Services                                                         FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 14
                                                                                      MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



                                            ACL’s Administration on Aging (AoA) Family Caregiver Support Services
                                            enables family members who have a loved one with disabilities or
                                            conditions that require assistance to use an array of supportive services
                                            including: respite care, information and assistance, support groups, and
                                            training. Caregivers are frequently under substantial strain with the
                                            responsibilities of caring for their ill relative while also caring for children
                                            or other family members while employed. Since 2008, Family Caregiver
                                            Support Services clients have rated services good to excellent consistently
                                            above the target level of 90 percent.
  A woman participates in an AoA
  exercise program in Juneau, AK.



Strategic Goal Four: Increase Efficiency, Transparency and Accountability of HHS Programs

As the largest grant-awarding agency in the Federal Government and the
nation’s largest health insurer, HHS places a high priority on ensuring the
integrity of its expenditures. HHS manages hundreds of programs in basic and
applied science, public health, income support, child development, and health
and social services which award over 75,000 grants annually. The Department
has robust processes in place to manage the resources and information
employed to support programs and activities.

One of CMS’ key goals is to pay claims properly the first time. This means paying the right amount, to legitimate
providers, for covered, reasonable and necessary services provided to eligible beneficiaries. Paying correctly the
first time saves resources required to recover improper payments and ensures the proper expenditure of valuable
Medicare Trust Fund dollars. The Medicare Fee-for-Service (FFS) improper payment estimate is calculated under
the Comprehensive Error Rate Testing (CERT) Program. Between FY 2009 and FY 2012, the improper payment rate
consistently improved. Recent data from FY 2013 indicates an increase in this rate and efforts are currently in
progress to investigate and resolve the drivers causing this increase.



                Percentage of Improper Payments Made Under the Medicare Fee-for-Service Program
                                                  (* result exceeded target)



                                    10.8%                                               10.1%
                                               9.1%*          8.6%             8.5%




                                FY 2009     FY 2010      FY 2011         FY 2012      FY 2013




Department of Health and Human Services                                                      FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 15
                                                                                         MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



                                               Access to and quality of home and community-based services is
                                               foundational to the success of ACL’s programs. According to the most
                                               recent data reported in early FY 2013, the Aging Services Network
                                               served 8,881 clients per million dollars of Title III Older Americans Act
                                               (OAA) funding in FY 2011 continuing to demonstrate the success of the
                                               Aging Services Network in employing available tools to enhance the use
                                               of OAA funds as this indicator has achieved its efficiency performance
                                               targets for the past seven years. This also serves to address performance
  An older man receives a home-delivered       efficiency at all levels of ACL’s AoA in the provision of home and
  meal from a volunteer in Baltimore, MD
                                               community-based services, including caregiver services.
  as part of an ACL program.



 Number of Clients Served by the Home and Community-Based Services, including Nutrition and Caregiver Services,
                            per Million Dollars of Title III Older Americans Act funding
                                                    (* result exceeded target)


          FY 2008                                     8,301*

          FY 2009                                                                8,544*

          FY 2010                                                     8,438*

          FY 2011                                                                                                    8,881*

 FY 2012 (Target)                                                                      8,600




ACF’s Head Start program works to ensure that the maximum number of
children are served and that federal funds are used appropriately and efficiently
by measuring under-enrollment across programs. Since Head Start grantees
range in size from super-grantees with multiple delegate agencies serving up to
20,000 children to individual centers that serve as few as 15 children, a national
under-enrollment rate better captures the under-enrollment than the
proportion of grantees that meet under-enrollment targets.

The most recent data available indicate that, during the FY 2011-2012 program year, Head Start grantees had, on
average, not enrolled 0.8 percent of the children they were funded to serve, continuing steady improvement in
this area. Further improvements are expected in FY 2013 resulting from continued program support and technical
assistance.
  Decrease in the Under-Enrollment Rate of Head Start Programs; Increased Number of Children Served Per Dollar
                                                    (* result exceeded target)


                     0.9%*                                     0.8%              0.8%*
                                          0.7%*                                                      0.7%




                     FY 2009              FY 2010           FY 2011              FY 2012           FY 2013
                                                                                                   (Target)



Department of Health and Human Services                                                         FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 16
                                                                                MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




                                          As part of its program assessment, the OMHA is evaluating its customer
                                          service through an independent evaluation. This will assure appellants and
                                          related parties are satisfied with their Administrative Law Judge Medicare
                                          Level III appeals experience based on beneficiary survey results. The data
                                          shows that, on a scale of 1 to 5, where 5 equals “very satisfied,”
                                          evaluations have consistently been over 4, which exceeds the yearly targets
                                          for this measure since FY 2008.



Strategic Goal Five: Strengthen the Nation’s HHS Infrastructure and Workforce

The nation faces shortages of critical health care workers, including
primary care physicians, nurses, behavioral health and long-term care
workers, as well as public health and human service professionals. More
than 64 million people currently live in an area that has a shortage of
primary care health professionals. HHS programs seek to address these          Officially coming into existence on
shortages, and ensure that there is an able health care workforce in the       April 11, 1953, the Cabinet-level
other areas that fall under the Department’s purview, such as                  Department of Health, Education and
                                                                               Welfare (HEW) was created under
biomedical research.                                                           President Eisenhower. In 1979, the
                                                                               Department of Education Organization
Head Start has shown a steady increase in the number of Head Start             Act was signed into law, providing for
teachers with an Associate of Arts (AA), Bachelor of Arts (BA), or other       a separate Department of Education.
advanced degree in early childhood education, supported by plans to            HEW became the Department of
                                                                               Health and Human Services, officially
improve the qualifications of staff. Based on the most recent data as of       arriving on May 4, 1980.
early FY 2013, 93.2 percent of Head Start teachers had an AA degree or
higher, missing the target of 100 percent but improving significantly over the previous result. The total FY 2012
figure represents an increase of 2,227 degreed teachers over the previous year demonstrating Head Start teachers
are better equipped to deliver quality instruction to Head Start children.



                  Percentage of Head Start Teachers with AA, BA, Advanced Degree, or Other Degree
                                   in a Field Related to Early Childhood Education
                                                 (* result exceeded target)

                                                                                                     100%
                                                                    88.2%         93.2%
           80.4%*             83.2%*            85%*




           FY 2008            FY 2009          FY 2010             FY 2011       FY 2012       FY 2013 (Target)




Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 17
                                                                                          MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



The National Health Service Corps (NHSC) addresses the nationwide
shortage of health care providers in health professional shortage areas by
providing recruitment and retention incentives in the form of scholarship
and loan repayment support to health professionals committed to a career
in primary care and service to underserved communities. The NHSC field
strength indicates the number of providers fulfilling active service
obligations with the NHSC in underserved areas in exchange
for scholarship or loan repayment support. As funding is available, the
program will continue to maximize this funding to build the primary care                    Absentee Shawnee Little Axe Health
workforce. In FY 2012, the NHSC field strength was 9,908 representing                       Center in Norman, OK.
almost triple the field strength of FY 2008.

     Field Strength of the NHSC, as Measured by the Number of Providers Fulfilling Active Service Obligations in
                             Exchange for Scholarship and Loan Repayment Agreements
                                                     (* result exceeded target)

                                                                        10,279*           9,908*
                                                    7,530*                                                   8,068

                                  4,808*
                 3,601



                FY 2008           FY 2009           FY 2010             FY 2011           FY 2012           FY 2013
                                                                                                            (Target)


                                    The CDC has over 30 years of international experience training public health
                                    leaders through its Field Epidemiology Training Programs (FETPs), a two-year
                                    applied capacity development program, modeled on the U.S. Epidemic
                                    Intelligence Service. Through FETPs, CDC helps establish a network of disease
                                    detectives around the globe that are the first line of defense in detecting and
                                    responding to outbreaks in their respective countries as well as neighboring
                                    countries. Since 1980, CDC has developed 50 international FETPs serving 94
                                    countries and graduated over 2,800 epidemiologists, in addition to continuing to
                                    add capacity as shown below by the number of new residents to the program.
  CDC Researcher


                Capacity of Epidemiology and Laboratory within Global Health Ministries through FETP
                                   As measured by the Number of New Residents
                                                     (* result exceeded target)



                                                               351*
                                                                                   280*                   255
                                            192*
                       134



                     FY 2009              FY 2010             FY 2011             FY 2012              FY 2013
                                                                                                       (Target)




Department of Health and Human Services                                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 18
                                                                                       MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




     ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND STEWARDSHIP INFORMATION
The financial statements were prepared in accordance with federal accounting standards and audited by the
independent accounting firm of Ernst & Young LLP, under the direction of our Inspector General. The Chief
Financial Officers Act requires the preparation and audit of these statements, which are part of our efforts for
continuous improvement of financial management. Accurate, timely and reliable financial information is necessary
for making sound decisions, assessing performance and allocating resources. The Financial Section of this report
presents our audited financial statements and notes.

Financial Condition: What is Our Financial Picture?

The table below summarizes trend information concerning components of our financial condition as of September
30 each year. The Consolidated Balance Sheet, found in the Financial Section of this report, presents our financial
condition as of September 30, 2013, compared to September 30, 2012, and displays assets, liabilities and net
position.

Another presentation of our financial picture is our Consolidated Statement of Net Cost, also found in the Financial
Section, with further detailed presentations, which can be found in the Other Information section. Year-over-year
summary changes for each of these statements are discussed in the following sections and provided in greater
detail in the Notes to the Principal Financial Statement found in the Financial Section of this report.




                                          Summary of Financial Condition Trends
                                                          (in Billions)

                                                                                                         $ Change       % Change
                                                 2009       2010           2011      2012       2013     (2012-13)      (2012-13)
Total Assets                                    $ 562.8   $ 563.7         $ 532.9   $ 530.7    $ 470.2     $ (60.5)         (11.4)
   Fund Balance with Treasury                    162.0      182.2          166.9     197.3      159.2          (38.1)       (19.3)
   Investments, Net                              381.1      359.9          325.4     306.4      281.7          (24.7)        (8.1)
   Other Assets                                    19.7       21.6           40.6      27.0      29.3            2.3          8.5
Total Liabilities                               $ 94.4    $ 99.2          $ 104.9   $ 99.5     $ 107.5     $     8.0         8.0
   Accounts Payable                                 1.1        1.6            1.2       1.1        1.2           0.1         9.1
   Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable            72.2       72.7           80.9      72.5      77.3            4.8         6.6
   Accrued Grant Liability                          4.0        4.2            4.5       3.7        3.9           0.2         5.4
   Federal Employee and Veterans’ Benefits          9.7       10.0           10.2      11.0      11.6            0.6         5.5
   Other Liabilities                                7.4       10.7            8.1      11.2      13.5            2.3        20.5
Net Position                                    $ 468.4   $ 464.5         $ 428.0   $ 431.2    $ 362.7     $ (68.5)         (15.9)

Total Liabilities and Net Position              $ 562.8   $ 563.7         $ 532.9   $ 530.7    $ 470.2     $ (60.5)        (11.4)




Department of Health and Human Services                                                       FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 19
                                                                              MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Assets: What Do We Own and Manage?

Assets represent the value of what we own and manage. Our total assets
were $470.2 billion on September 30, 2013. This amount represents a
decrease of $60.5 billion or 11.4 percent less than last year’s assets. This
$60.5 billion decrease in assets is primarily attributable to a decrease in Net
                                                                                  In 1965, the Medicare and
Investments of $24.6 billion for the Medicare Trust Funds. In addition, the       Medicaid programs were
assets included a decrease in Fund Balance with Treasury in FY 2013               created, making comprehensive
compared to FY 2012 of $38.1 billion ($159.2 billion and $197.3 billion,          health care available to millions
                                                                                  of Americans.
respectively). The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in
Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI) of $14.3 billion and a decrease by
Medicaid in the amount of $15.8 billion. The decrease was also offset by an increase in the Hospital Insurance (HI)
program in the amount of $0.5 billion.

                                          Figure 1: FY 2013 Assets by Type
                                                     (In Billions)




The Federal Government does not set aside assets to pay future benefits associated with Medicare. Treasury
securities (our Net Investments) are the funds from dedicated collections for the Medicare program. Trust fund
holdings not necessary to meet current expenditures are invested in interest-bearing U.S. Treasury securities. The
securities held by the Medicare Trust Fund provide the authority to make expenditures. As a result, our Net
Investments declined by $24.6 billion in FY 2013 for Medicare. The investment decreased to meet the cash
requirements related to Medicare, primarily for the HI program in the amount of $22.6 billion and the SMI
program in the amount of $2.0 billion. Although Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) and Self Employment
Contributions Act (SECA) contributions, or revenues, are beginning to grow following the national recession, the HI
investments continue to decrease as expenses exceed revenues.

We have experienced a slight change in the overall composition of our assets in FY 2013 compared to FY 2012. The
Fund Balance with Treasury and Net Investments together currently comprise 93.8 percent of our total assets
compared to 94.9 percent at the end of FY 2012. The remaining FY 2013 assets, totaling $29.3 billion or
6.2 percent, consists of: Accounts Receivable; Inventory and Related Property; General Property, Plant and
Equipment; Advances; and Other Assets, compared to FY 2012, which represented 5.1 percent of our total assets.
This change in asset composition is directly related to a decrease in advance payments by CMS for the Medicare
Advantage and Prescription Drug plans for services provided in October 2012.




Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 20
                                                                               MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Liabilities: What Do We Owe?

Our liabilities, or amounts that we owe from past transactions or events, were $107.5 billion on September 30,
2013. This represents an increase of $8.0 billion, or 8.0 percent more than the FY 2012 liabilities, primarily due to
Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable and Other Liabilities. Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable increased by
$4.8 billion, or a 6.6 percent change from FY 2012, due to the Medicare and Medicaid programs. This represents
71.9 percent and 72.9 percent of our total liabilities in FY 2013 and FY 2012, respectively. Additionally, Other
Liabilities increased by $2.3 billion, or a 20.5 percent change from FY 2012, primarily due to contingencies related
to the Medicaid audit and program disallowances and reimbursements of State Plan Amendments for program
audit deferrals.

                                          Figure 2: FY 2013 Liabilities by Type
                                                       (in Billions)




Consistent with federal accounting standards, we recognize the responsibility for future program participants of
Medicare as a social insurance program, rather than a pension program. Accordingly, we have not recognized a
liability for future payments to current and future program participants. The estimated long-term cost for
Medicare is included in the Statement of Social Insurance (SOSI) and discussed later in this analysis. A more
extensive discussion is provided in the Notes to the Principal Financial Statements located in the Financial Section
of this report.

Ending Net Position: What Have We Done Over Time?

Our net position represents the difference between assets and liabilities. Changes in our net position result from
changes that occur within the Cumulative Results of Operations and Unexpended Appropriations. Our net position
decreased by $68.5 billion (15.9 percent), from $431.2 billion in FY 2012 to $362.7 billion in FY 2013. The $362.7
billion includes $248.5 billion for funds from dedicated collections (compared to $287.5 billion in FY 2012) and
$114.2 billion for FY 2013 for all other funds (compared to the FY 2012 ending balance of $143.7 billion).

The FY 2013 decrease of $68.5 billion includes a decrease of $16.0 billion in funds from dedicated collections
unexpended appropriations, $30.1 billion in unexpended appropriations for all other funds and $23.0 billion in
funds from dedicated collections cumulative results of operation. The decrease was offset by an increase of $0.6
billion in cumulative results of operations for all other funds. Net position is the sum of the cumulative results of
operations since inception and unexpended appropriations that represent those appropriations provided to HHS
that remain unused at the end of the fiscal year.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 21
                                                                              MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Net Cost of Operations: What Are Our Sources and Uses of Funds?

Our net cost of operations represents the difference between the costs incurred by our programs less associated
revenues. We receive the majority of our funding through Congressional appropriations and reimbursement for
the provision of goods or services to other federal agencies. Our Net Cost of Operations for the year ended
September 30, 2013, totalled $896.3 billion.

Figure 3 depicts our FY 2013 Combined Net Cost of Operations by major budget function and significant
components. The majority of FY 2013 net costs relate to Medicare ($498.6 billion) and Health ($345.9 billion)
programs, or more than 94.2 percent of our annual net costs. During FY 2013, the Medicare budget function
experienced growth of 4.4 percent ($20.9 billion) and Health increased 5.7 percent ($18.5 billion).

The growth in the Medicare budget function is primarily attributable to benefit expenses increases in SMI of $9.8
billion and HI of $11.0 billion.

               Figure 3: FY 2013 Combined Net Cost of Operations by Budget Function
                                                   (in Billions)




The FY 2013 Net Cost represents an increase of $40.7 billion or 4.8 percent more than the FY 2012 Net Cost of
Operations. Approximately 86.9 percent of the Net Cost of Operations ($779.2 billion) relates to Medicare,
Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and other health programs managed CMS. The Table on
the next page depicts our Net Cost of Operations by major component for the last five years.




Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 22
                                                                                       MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



                                                 Net Cost of Operations
                                                       (in Billions)
                                                                                                                $ Change % Change
                                                        2009       2010       2011        2012         2013 (2012-13) (2012-13)
  Responsibility Segments
      CMS Gross Cost                                  $ 749.0    $ 789.7    $ 817.4    $ 802.3       $ 848.9       $ 46.6     5.8
      CMS Exchange Revenue                              (57.3)     (60.7)     (63.7)     (65.1)        (69.7)        (4.6)   7.1
          CMS Net Cost of Operations                  $ 691.7    $ 729.0    $ 753.7    $ 737.2       $ 779.2       $ 42.0     5.7


  Other Segments:
      Other Segments Gross Cost of Operations         $ 116.0    $ 130.9    $ 128.2     $ 121.5      $ 121.0       $ (0.5)   (0.4)
      Other Segment Exchange Revenue                     (3.8)      (3.2)      (3.8)      (3.2)         (3.9)        (0.7)   21.9
         Other Segments Net Cost of Operations        $ 112.2    $ 127.7    $ 124.4     $ 118.3      $ 117.1       $ (1.2)   (1.0)

  Net Cost of Operations                              $ 803.9    $ 856.7    $ 878.1     $ 855.5      $ 896.3       $ 40.8     4.8




Budgetary and Non-Budgetary Resources: What Were Our Resources and the Status of
Funds?

The Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources provides information on availability of budgetary and non-
budgetary resources at the end of the year. FY 2013 total resources were $1.3 trillion, representing an increase of
$33.9 billion, or 2.6 percent, over FY 2012. FY 2013 total obligations of $1.3 trillion increased by $76.2 billion, or
6.3 percent, compared to FY 2012. Our year-end resources were $41.7 billion, of which $9.6 billion are not yet
available for expenditure as of September 30, 2013. Total net outlays (cash disbursed for HHS’ obligations) of
$888.2 billion increased by $40.0 billion or 4.7 percent from FY 2012 net outlays of $848.2 billion.

Statement of Social Insurance

The SOSI presents the 75-year actuarial present value of the income and expenditures of the HI and SMI Trust
Funds. Future expenditures are expected to arise from the formulas specified in current law for current and future
program participants. This projection is considered to be important information regarding the potential future cost
of the program. These projected potential future obligations under current law are not included in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet, Statements of Net Cost and Changes in Net Position, or Combined Statement of
Budgetary Resources.

The SOSI presents the following estimates:

 • The present value of future income (income excluding interest) to be received from or on behalf of current
   participants who have attained eligibility age and the future cost of providing benefits to those same
   individuals;

 • The present value of future income to be received from or on behalf of current participants who have not yet
   attained eligibility age and the future cost of providing benefits to those same individuals;




Department of Health and Human Services                                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 23
                                                                                     MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



    • The present value of future income less future cost for the closed group, which represents all current
      participants who attain age 15 or older in the first year of the projection period, plus the assets in the combined
      HI and SMI Trust Funds as of the beginning of the valuation period;

    • The present value of income to be received from or on behalf of future participants and the cost of providing
      benefits to those same individuals;

    • The present value of future income less future cost for the open group, which represents all current and future
      participants (including those born during the projection period) who are now participating or are expected to
      eventually participate in the Medicare program, plus the assets in the combined HI and SMI Trust Funds as of
      the beginning of the valuation period; and

    • The present value of future cash flows for all current and future participants over the next 75 years (open group
      measure) increased from $(5.6) trillion, determined as of January 1, 2012, to $(4.8) trillion, determined as of
      January 1, 2013.

Including the combined HI and SMI Trust Fund assets increases the present value, as of January 1, 2013, of future
cash flow for all current and future participants to $(4.5) trillion for the 75-year valuation period. The comparable
closed group of participants, including the combined HI and SMI Trust Fund assets, is $(9.4) trillion.

HI Trust Fund Solvency

Pay-As-You-Go Financing
The HI Trust Fund is deemed to be solvent as long as assets are
sufficient to finance program obligations. Such solvency is
indicated, for any point in time, by the maintenance of positive
Trust Fund assets. In recent years, current expenditures have
exceeded program income for the HI program, and thus, the HI
Trust Fund assets have been declining. The following table shows
that HI Trust Fund assets, expressed as a ratio of the assets at
the beginning of the fiscal year to the expenditures for the year.
This ratio has steadily dropped from 134 percent at the
beginning of FY 2009 to 85 percent at the beginning of FY 2013.


                                                          Trust Fund Ratio 1
                                                       Beginning of Fiscal Year
                                              2009                  2010    2011              2012               2013
                   HI                       134.0%                 124.0%   106.0%           94.0%               85.0%




1
    Assets at the beginning of the year to expenditures during the year.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                     FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 24
                                                                               MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Short-Term Financing
The HI Trust Fund is deemed adequately financed for the short term when actuarial estimates of Trust Fund assets
for the beginning of each calendar year are at least as large as program obligations for the year. Estimates in the
2013 Trustees Report indicate that the HI Trust Fund is not adequately financed over the next 10 years. Under the
intermediate assumptions of the 2013 Trustees Report, the HI Trust Fund ratio is estimated to steadily decline to
about 48 percent by the beginning of calendar year 2022. From the end of 2012 to the end of 2022, assets are
expected to decline by 13 percent, from $220 billion to $192 billion.

Long-Term Financing
HI financing is not projected to be sustainable over the long term with the tax rates and expenditure levels
projected in current law. Program cost will exceed total income in all years of the 75-year projection period. In
2026, the HI Trust Fund will be exhausted according to the projections by the CMS Office of the Actuary. Under
current law, when the HI Trust Fund is exhausted, full benefits cannot be paid on a timely basis. Tax revenues are
projected to be sufficient to support 87 percent of projected expenditures after the HI Trust Fund exhaustion in
2026, declining to 73 percent of projected expenditures in 2087.

The primary reasons for the projected long-term inadequacy of financing under current law relate to the fact that
the ratio of the number of workers paying taxes relative to the number of beneficiaries eligible for benefits drops
from 3.43 in 2012 to about 2.1 by 2087. In addition, health care costs continue to rise faster than the taxable
wages used to support the program. In present value terms, the 75-year shortfall is $4.6 trillion, which is 1.1
percent of taxable payroll and 0.5 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) over the same period.

Significant uncertainty surrounds the estimates for the SOSI. In particular, the actual future values of demographic,
economic, and programmatic factors are likely to be different from the near-term and ultimate assumptions used
in the projections. For more information, please refer to the Required Supplementary Information: Social Insurance
disclosures required by the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB).

SMI Trust Fund Solvency
The SMI Trust Fund consists of two accounts—Part B and Part D. In order to evaluate the financial status of the SMI
Trust Fund, each account needs to be assessed individually, since financing rates for each part are established
separately, their program benefits are quite different in nature, and there is no provision for transferring assets.

While differences between the two accounts exist, the financing mechanism for each part is similar in that the
financing is determined on a yearly basis. The Part B account is generally financed by premiums and general
revenue matching appropriations determined annually to cover projected program expenditures and to provide a
contingency for unexpected program variation. The Part D account is financed by premiums, general revenues, and
transfers from state governments. Unlike the Part B account, Part D has a flexible general revenue appropriation,
which means that general revenues cover the remaining cost of providing Part D benefits, thereby eliminating the
need to maintain a normal contingency reserve.

Since both the Part B and Part D programs are financed on a yearly basis, from a program perspective, there is no
unfunded liability in the short or long-range. Therefore, in this financial statement the present value of estimated
future excess of income over expenditures for current and future participants over the next 75 years is $0.
However, from a government-wide perspective, general fund transfers as well as interest payments to the
Medicare Trust Funds and asset redemption, represent a draw on other Federal resources for which there is no
earmarked source of revenue from the public. Hence, from a government-wide perspective, the corresponding
estimate of future expenditures less income for the 75-year projection period is $(22.5) trillion.



Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 25
                                                                                                         MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




Even though from a program perspective, the unfunded liability is $0, there is concern over the rapid cost of the
SMI program as a percent of GDP. In 2012, SMI expenditures were 1.99 percent of GDP. By 2087, SMI expenditures
are projected to grow to 4.01 percent of the GDP.

The following table presents key amounts from our basic financial statements for FY 2011 through FY 2013.


                                                      Table of Key Measures 2
                                               Based on the CMS Financial Statements 3
                                                                           (in Billions)

                                                                                                          2013              2012              2011
    Net Position (end of fiscal year)
      Assets                                                                                         $    370.2        $    424.8      $      424.2
      Less Total Liabilities                                                                               88.3              80.5              87.5
    Net Position (assets net of liabilities)                                                         $    281.9        $    344.3      $      336.7

    Change in Net Position (end of fiscal year)
      Net Costs                                                                                      $   779.7         $    737.8      $      754.1
      Total Financing Sources                                                                             756.1             710.8             730.4
       Change in Net Position                                                                        $   (23.6)        $    (27.0)     $      (23.7)

    Statement of Social Insurance (calendar year basis)

       Present value of estimated future income (excluding interest) less expenditures for current   $ (4,772)         $   (5,581)      $    (3,252)
       and future participants over the next 75 years (open group), current year valuation

       Present value of estimated future income (excluding interest) less expenditures for current       (5,581)           (3,252)           (2,683)
       and future participants over the next 75 years (open group), prior year valuation


       Change in present value                                                                       $      809        $   (2,329)      $     (569)




2
    The table or other singular presentation showing the measures described above. Although, the closed group measure is not required to be
presented in the table or other singular presentation, the CMS presents the closed group measure and open group measure.
3
  Available at http://www.cms.gov.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 26
                                                                                MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Statement of Changes in Social Insurance Amounts (SCSIA)

The SCSIA reconciles the change (between the current valuation period and the prior valuation period) in the
present value of future tax income less future cost for current and future participants (the open group measure)
over the next 75 years. This reconciliation identifies those components of the change that are significant and
provides reasons for the changes.

The present value as of January 1, 2013, would have decreased by $285 billion due to advancing the valuation date
by one year and including the additional year 2087. However, changes in the projection base, demographic
assumptions, economic and health care assumptions, and legislation changes increased the present value of future
cash flows by $308 billion, $724 billion, $31 billion, and $31 billion, respectively.

Required Supplementary Information (RSI)

As required by Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards (SSFAS) Number 17, Accounting for Social
Insurance (as amended by SFFAS Number 37, Social Insurance: Additional Requirements for Management
Discussion and Analysis and Basic Financial Statements), CMS has included information about the Medicare Trust
Funds—HI and SMI. The RSI presents required long-range cash-flow projections, the long-range projections of the
ratio of contributors to beneficiaries (dependency ratio), and the sensitivity analysis illustrating the effect of the
changes in the most significant assumptions on the actuarial projections and present values. The SFFAS Number 37
does not eliminate or otherwise affect the SFFAS Number 17 requirements for the supplementary information,
except that actuarial projections of annual cash flow in nominal dollars are no longer required; as such, it will not
be reported in the RSI. The RSI assesses the sufficiency of future budgetary resources to sustain program services
and meet program obligations as they come due. The information is drawn from the 2013 Annual Report of the
Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds,
which represents the official government evaluation of the financial and actuarial status of the Medicare Trust
Funds.



Limitations of the Principal Financial Statements

The principal financial statements in the Financial Section have been prepared to report our financial position and
results of operations, pursuant to the requirements of 31 U.S.C. §3515(b). Although the statements have been
prepared from our books and records in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for
federal entities and the formats prescribed by the OMB, the statements are in addition to the financial reports
used to monitor and control budgetary resources, which are prepared from the same books and records.

The statements should be read with the realization that they are for a component of the U.S. Government, a
sovereign entity. One implication of this is that liabilities cannot be liquidated without legislation providing HHS
with resources and budget authority.

The RSI section is unique to Federal financial reporting. This section is required under OMB Circular A-136,
Financial Reporting Requirements, and is unaudited.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 27
                                                                             MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




                  SYSTEMS, LEGAL COMPLIANCE AND INTERNAL CONTROLS
SYSTEMS

HHS financial management systems are designed to support effective internal controls and to produce accurate,
reliable and timely financial information. Our current financial systems portfolio, referred to as “Global UFMS”
hereinafter, is depicted in the image below:

                           Global Unified Financial Management System
                                           (Global UFMS)




Global UFMS and its major components are described below.

  1. The financial management systems component (shown above in the Financial Management Systems layer),
     consists of three financial management and accounting systems that offer HHS a platform for effectively
     processing and tracking its financial and accounting transactions, while meeting the unique business needs of
     the users. The specific systems are shown below:

         • UFMS is the integrated financial management system with four standardized sub-ledgers (one for each
           of the OPDIVs shown above with the Program Support Center (PSC) supporting five OPDIVs and the
           Office of the Secretary);
         • The Healthcare Integrated General Ledger Accounting System (HIGLAS) at CMS serves 15 Medicare
           Administrative Contractors (MACs) processing medical payments with its single standardized sub-
           ledger; and
         • The National Institutes of Health Business System (NBS) serves 27 separate research institutes and
           centers supporting health research, an integral part of the HHS mission, with its single standardized
           sub-ledger.




Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 28
                                                                                 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Built upon a web-based commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) solution, these three systems allow HHS to reliably
execute financial management procedures and business processes over a common infrastructure across the
enterprise.

  2. The reporting systems component of Global UFMS (shown above in the Reporting Systems layer) consists of
     two reporting solutions that accept data from the financial management systems and facilitate reconciliation,
     financial analysis and management reporting. The specific systems are described below:

         • The Consolidated Financial Reporting System (CFRS), implemented during FY 2011, enables HHS to
           systematically consolidate information from the three financial management systems. It generates the
           formal, HHS-wide consolidated financial statements and other managerial reports on a consistent,
           timely and reliable basis.
         • The Enterprise Financial Business Intelligence System (FBIS), which HHS is implementing in phases,
           with the second phase rolled out during FY 2013, currently gathers information from core financial
           systems into a sustainable business intelligence platform for integrated, timely, and accurate reporting
           and analysis. This system facilitates the delivery of actionable data to the appropriate users across all
           financial systems. HHS leadership primarily accesses this data using executive dashboards and
           scorecards for strategic decision-making. Management employees primarily rely on financial reports
           and alerts for making tactical decisions and managing operations. Staff employees throughout the
           Department utilize operational reports, ad hoc queries and drill-down capabilities to support their
           transactional processing responsibilities. FBIS is currently integrated directly with UFMS and indirectly
           to HIGLAS and NBS, thereby providing access to the financial and accounting data of these systems.

The primary goals for Global UFMS are to consistently strengthen internal controls, to maintain data integrity and
transparency and to report reliable financial information on a timely basis. In addition, it is one of HHS priorities to
ensure continual systems improvement that is accomplished by addressing weaknesses identified in audits and by
performing self-evaluations and monitoring of our financial management controls, systems and processes.

These objectives align with the requirement to abide by all relevant federal laws, regulations and authoritative
guidance. In addition, HHS seeks to comply with federal financial management systems requirements such as those
listed below:

         • Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982

         • Chief Financial Officers Act

         • Government Management Reform Act of 1994
                                                                                       In 1964, the first report of the
         • Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996                        Surgeon General's Advisory
                                                                                       Committee on Smoking and
         • Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996                                                   Health concluded that
                                                                                       cigarette smoke is a cause of
         •    Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002                      lung and laryngeal cancer.

         • OMB Regulations related to these laws.

In line with the goals described above and, anticipating the need to meet new business and reporting demands,
HHS has developed a Department-wide financial systems improvement strategy and is executing it incrementally
over time based on a high-level roadmap. The most critical component of this multi-year initiative addresses the
need to upgrade the three financial management systems since the software vendor will end its support for the
current version of the software in December 2014. By upgrading, HHS will maintain a secure and reliable systems



Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 29
                                                                             MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



environment while protecting its investment. Through this strategy, HHS will also implement data standards that
will improve data integrity, enhance the accuracy of financial reporting and reduce the need for burdensome and
manual reconciliations. Another key component of this strategy is the pursuit of sharing initiatives, ranging from
the standardization of accounting treatment across systems to the transitioning of financial management systems
environment to managed cloud / hosting providers. At the same time, HHS will expand the use of business
intelligence incrementally to further enhance financial management information and reporting, strengthen
internal controls and facilitate effective decision-making.

To support the financial systems improvement strategy, HHS is also establishing a Department-wide governance
structure to provide oversight of the financial management systems portfolio as well as manage the integration
and alignment of the related core financial projects. This governance structure will ensure efficient execution of
project responsibilities and Department-wide coordination of project activities.




LEGAL COMPLIANCE

Anti-Deficiency Act
As noted in our FY 2012 AFR, HHS investigated potential reportable violations. As required by the Anti-Deficiency
Act, we are in the process of notifying all appropriate authorities of such violations. HHS notifications may be
found at http://www.gao.gov/legal/lawresources/antideficiencyrpts.html

HHS management has taken and continues to take, all necessary steps to prevent future violations. With respect to
other possible issues, we are working through investigations and further assessment where necessary. We remain
fully committed to resolving these matters appropriately and complying with all aspects of the law.

Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity and Federal Financial Management Improvement Acts
In 1982, Congress enacted the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA). Under FMFIA, federal agencies
must provide reasonable assurances that agencies have established internal accounting and administrative
controls to prevent waste or misuse of agency funds or property and to assure the accountability of assets,
including conformance of the agency’s accounting system with government-wide standards. The FMFIA also
requires a plan and schedule for correction of any weaknesses identified in the report.

In 1996, Congress enacted the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act (FFMIA). As described in OMB
Circular No. A-127, Financial Management Systems, FFMIA expanded upon FMFIA by requiring that agencies
implement and maintain financial management systems that comply substantially with federal financial
management systems requirements, applicable federal accounting standards and the U.S. Standard General Ledger
at the transaction level.

The material weakness that resulted in the non-compliance with FFMIA is related to system security controls that
are described in the Statement of Assurance section of the AFR. This section also describes the corrective action
plan that HHS will execute to resolve this weakness as it continues working towards its goal of making Global UFMS
fully compliant with FFMIA. This multi-faceted effort also encompasses improvements to all HHS financial
management and reporting systems, as well as enhanced policies and procedures.




Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 30
                                                                               MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



The following briefly describes our accomplishments during FY 2013.

UFMS and its Related Reporting Systems
HHS carefully reviewed the weaknesses related to UFMS and its related reporting systems and has developed
corrective action plans. HHS also significantly strengthened its FFMIA compliance process by updating its A-127-
related system inventory, formalizing the review/approval procedures that the business owner and OPDIVs utilize
throughout the year, and providing additional FFMIA training. In addition, HHS is committed to its corrective action
plans through active management engagement in its compliance process to remove the identified system
weaknesses.

HHS recently implemented Financial Business Intelligence System (FBIS) which has been of particular assistance
during the process. FBIS provides users with integrated financial reporting and business analytics capabilities using
data from HHS’ distinct financial management systems and other data sources. Among the many benefits that this
system offers, those shown below are especially helpful for attaining and then maintaining compliance with
FFMIA:

  •   Improves data integrity and reduces manual review efforts;
  •   Consolidates and reconciles data sourced from different systems;
  •   Strengthens internal controls to ensure that errors and irregularities are detected in a timely manner; and
  •   Provides tools for verifying accounting data and for analyzing reported account balances in a timely fashion.

HIGLAS
HIGLAS is a single, integrated dual-entry accounting system that standardizes and centralizes federal financial
accounting and replaces the existing accounting/payment systems for Medicare and Medicaid. Although Medicare
contractors’ claims processing systems were operating effectively in adjudicating health care claims in the past,
before the phased rollout of HIGLAS, the systems were not designed to meet the requirements of a dual-entry
general ledger accounting system. As a result, they did not meet the provisions of FFMIA.

Following the guidance of the OMB Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources, CMS acquired a
COTS product. As a result, in FY 2012 CMS became substantially compliant with the FFMIA and considers its
financial systems to be integrated in accordance with OMB Circular A-127. Through the implementation of HIGLAS
among the Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) and the implementation of the administrative program
accounting functions at the CMS Central office, CMS core program dollars (i.e., Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP) are
accounted for in HIGLAS. Since going "live" in May 2005, HIGLAS has processed more than 4.75 billion financial
transactions and over 181.8 million payments worth $1.71 trillion, as of June 2013.

HIGLAS will continue to enhance CMS’ oversight of MACs’ financial operations and the accounting and reporting of
other CMS activities, while also providing high-quality, timely data for decision-making and performance
measurement.

NBS
NBS is a fully integrated financial, property, acquisition and logistics management system that supports NIH’s core
administrative and financial operations. NBS fosters NIH’s mission through the provision of secure, accurate and
timely business transaction capabilities that enable the NIH scientific community and supporting organizations to
acquire needed assets, goods and services. It also provides accurate source information that facilitates data-driven
decision-making by the NIH management community regarding budgets, finance, acquisitions and property
management. Overall, NBS supports HHS’ goal of “achieving excellence in management practices” through
accountability and transparency. NBS management is actively remediating application security management audit
findings related to audit log monitoring and segregation of duties. The audit finding related to audit log monitoring



Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 31
                                                                                MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



is undergoing review for potential closure in FY 2013, while the segregation of duties finding is targeted for closure
during FY 2014.

Collectively, these improvements have significantly enhanced HHS’ financial management systems’ compliance
with FFMIA. However, management will continue to improve policies and implement corrective actions on any
deficiencies identified.

Improper Payments Reporting
The Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act (IPERA; signed into law on July 22, 2010) and the Improper
Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act (IPERIA; signed into law on January 10, 2013), amended the
Improper Payments Information Act (IPIA; signed into law on November 26, 2002). The IPIA, as amended, requires
each federal agency to review all programs and activities that it administers and identify all such programs and
activities that may be susceptible to significant improper payments. For programs that are identified as susceptible
to significant improper payments (known as high-risk programs), it also requires that each agency report improper
payment estimates and various other related information. In addition, the IPIA as amended by IPERA significantly
increases our recovery auditing efforts by expanding the definition of payments recovered to include program
payments. More recently, the IPIA as amended by IPERIA requires federal agencies to utilize the Do Not Pay
solution to identify, prevent, and reduce improper payments. The Other Information section of this report contains
detailed information on our improper payment activities.

HHS has shown tremendous leadership in the improper payments arena. HHS has published an error rate for
Medicare FFS since FY 1996 and reported Foster Care error rates since FY 2004. Between FY 2004 and FY 2012, the
Head Start error rate declined from 3.9 percent to 0.6 percent. In FY 2013, based on Head Start’s strong internal
controls, monitoring systems, and low reported error rates, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) granted
HHS relief from reporting annual error rate estimates for Head Start. In lieu of an annual error rate measurement,
HHS will oversee Head Start’s performance through existing internal controls and monitoring systems, and
incorporate the program into the improper payment risk assessment cycle. In addition, beginning in September
2014, HHS will submit an annual report to OMB that describes Head Start’s policies, controls, and corrective
actions to prevent and mitigate improper payments in the program, as well as any control deficiencies, risks, and
trends that are identified.

HHS continues to face challenges in developing an improper payment estimate for the Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF) program. Due to statutory limitations, HHS is unable to compel States to collect the
information needed to conduct an improper payment measurement. When legislation is considered to reauthorize
TANF, HHS plans to encourage Congress to include changes that would allow for reliable error rate measurement.
In the meantime, HHS continues to encourage States to implement corrective actions to reduce and prevent
improper payments.

Table 1 in the Improper Payments Reporting section (found in the Other Information section of this report)
displays HHS specific error rate results and associated notes for the current year (CY) 2013, the prior year (PY)
2012, as well as the targets for the years 2014 through 2016. In FY 2013, HHS is reporting improper payment
estimates for seven high-risk programs, of which five are reporting lower error rate estimates in FY 2013 than were
reported in FY 2012. Two programs – Medicare Fee-For-Service (FFS) and Medicare Part D –reported an increase
in the FY 2013 error rates compared to the FY 2012 error rates. While HHS strives to decrease its error rates,
sometimes an increase occurs. However, an increase in an error rate does not necessarily indicate a breakdown in
the program’s internal control structure. For example, one reason for the increase in the reported FY 2013
Medicare FFS error rate is that the program issued new policies (e.g., a policy requiring documentation of face-to-
face encounters with physicians prior to providing home health services). Although this policy change will



Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 32
                                                                              MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



ultimately strengthen the integrity of the program, there is a change management aspect to implementing new
policies. Since it takes time for providers and suppliers to fully implement new policies, especially those with new
documentation requirements, it is not unusual to see increases in error rates following the implementation of new
policies. As a result, increases in error rates may not necessarily indicate increases in internal control risk.



INTERNAL CONTROLS

FMFIA and OMB Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control, require agencies to evaluate and
report on the effectiveness of internal controls in place to ensure effectiveness and efficiency of operation,
compliance with applicable laws and regulations and reliable financial reporting. HHS has completed these very
rigorous assessments since FY 2006.

Managers throughout HHS are responsible for ensuring that
effective internal controls are implemented in their areas of
responsibility. Senior management throughout HHS provide
assurance statements annually concerning the effectiveness and           Located at the foot of Capitol Hill in
efficiency of internal controls within programs, the reliability of      Washington D.C., the Hubert H. Humphrey
                                                                         Building is the headquarters building of the
internal control over financial reporting and compliance with            U.S. Department of Health and Human
applicable laws and regulations. The HHS Risk Management and             Services. The naming of the building in
Financial Oversight Board (RMFOB) assesses all senior management         1977 marked the first time that a federal
assurances and provides the Secretary with a recommendation to           building had been dedicated to a living
                                                                         person. Hubert Humphrey, who served as
sign the Agency’s Statement of Assurance, included on the next           U.S. senator from Minnesota and Vice
page.                                                                    President of the United States, was born in
                                                                         1911 and died in 1978.
HHS continues to strengthen our internal control assessment
process to be more effective and inclusive so that management can identify risks and implement timely corrective
actions. The HHS FY 2013 self-assessment, as well as the financial statement audit, identified one material
weakness, which also constitutes a non-conformance under Section 4 of FMFIA, and one material noncompliance,
which are respectively: (1) Information System Controls and Security and (2) Error Rate Measurement.

HHS believes that maintaining integrity and accountability in all programs and operations is critical to our mission
and demonstrates responsible stewardship over assets and resources. It also promotes responsible leadership,
ensures the effective delivery of high quality services to our customers and maximizes desired program outcomes.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 33
                                                                                MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




                                          STATEMENT OF ASSURANCE




The Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS or the Department) management is responsible for
establishing and maintaining effective internal control and financial management systems that meet the objectives
of the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA) and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular
A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control, dated December 21, 2004. These objectives are to ensure
(1) effective and efficient operations; (2) compliance with applicable laws and regulations; and (3) reliable financial
reporting.

As required by OMB Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control, HHS has evaluated its
internal control and financial management systems to determine whether these objectives are being met.
Accordingly, HHS provides a qualified statement of reasonable assurance that its internal control and financial
systems meet the objectives of FMFIA. This statement is qualified due to one material weakness, which also
constitutes a non-conformance under Section 4 of FMFIA, and one material noncompliance with the Improper
Payments Information Act (IPIA):

     1.   Information System Controls and Security
     2.   Error Rate Measurement
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
HHS conducted its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which includes
safeguarding of assets and compliance with applicable laws and regulations, in accordance with the requirements
of Appendix A, OMB Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control. Based on the results of this
assessment, HHS identified one material weakness in its internal control over financial reporting relating to the
Department’s information system controls and security. Other than this exception, the Department provides
reasonable assurance that internal controls were operating effectively as of June 30, 2013, and no other material
weaknesses were found in the design or operation of the internal control over financial reporting.

Internal Control over Operations and Compliance
HHS conducted its assessment of internal control over the effectiveness and efficiency of operations and
compliance with applicable laws and regulations, in accordance with OMB Circular A-123, Management’s
Responsibility for Internal Control. Based on the results of this evaluation, HHS identified one material weakness in
its internal control over the effectiveness and efficiency of operations under Section 2 of FMFIA relating to the
Department’s information system controls and security, which also constitutes a non-conformance under Section 4
of FMFIA, and one material noncompliance with IPIA related to error rate measurement, as of September 30,
2013. Other than these exceptions, the Department provides reasonable assurance that internal controls over
operations and compliance with applicable laws and regulations as of September 30, 2013, were operating
effectively and no other material weaknesses were found in the design or execution of the internal controls over
operations and compliance.

/Kathleen Sebelius/
Kathleen Sebelius
Secretary
December 16, 2013


Department of Health and Human Services                                                 FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 34
                                                                              MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




      Summary of Material Weaknesses, Non-Compliance and System Non-Conformances

                                                  FMFIA Section 2                             FMFIA Section 4
                                                                           Financial             System
          Control                Operations          Compliance           Reporting          Non-Conformance
           Areas              (As of 9/30/2013)   (As of 9/30/2013)   (As of 6/30/2013)        (9/30/2013)
  1. Information
     System Controls                      1              0                    1                        1
     and Security
  2. Error Rate
                                          0              1                    0                        0
     Measurement

1. Information System Controls and Security
HHS acknowledges an internal control weakness related to system security, including general and application
controls in our financial management systems, and other information security weaknesses identified through the
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) annual review process. Although no one financial
management system had a material weakness, the pervasive nature of the findings across our organization leads
management to conclude that these findings warrant classification as a material weakness. While the Department
has made progress in the remediation of the financial management systems’ finding, our systems are not yet in
substantial conformance with the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act (FFMIA) of 1996 and its
associated regulatory guidelines, as established by the appropriate governing bodies with respect to overall system
security, as of September 30, 2013.

2. Error Rate Measurement
HHS did not identify any material weaknesses in our controls over compliance; however, we did identify one
process limitation relating to the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program that led to a material
noncompliance with IPIA. The TANF program is not reporting an error rate for Fiscal Year (FY) 2013 as statutory
limitations prohibit HHS from requiring States to participate in a TANF improper payment measurement. When
legislation is considered to reauthorize TANF, HHS plans to encourage Congress to include changes that would
facilitate reliable error rate measurement.




Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 35
                                                                             MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Corrective Action Plans and Impact of Material Weakness, Non-Compliance and System Non-
                                       Conformance
The following table lists the corrective action dates for the material weakness, noncompliance and system non-
conformance and their impact on the Department’s financial statements.

                                                                                  Impact
                                           Corrective
             Control Areas                Action Date                    on Financial Statements
  1. Information System Controls            FY 2015       Compensating controls exist through manual efforts
     and Security                                         that partially mitigate the risk of misstating the
                                                          financial statements.
  2. Error Rate Measurement                Ongoing        While error rate measurements do not directly impact
                                                          HHS’ financial statements, we are unable to report in
                                                          our Agency Financial Report (AFR) an estimate of
                                                          improper payments for TANF, as required by IPIA.

1. Information System Controls and Security
The range of challenges resulting in HHS’ Information Technology (IT) material weakness and system non-
conformance will require additional work beyond FY 2013 to address. In FY 2014, we will continue our efforts to
remediate this IT material weakness by continuing to work with the established joint Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
and Chief Information Officer (CIO) partnership to meet corrective action plan milestones and objectives. This
partnership expands ongoing efforts of the CFO, CIO, and Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) to address the
issues underlying the IT material weakness and system non-conformance. We will continue to identify high risk
areas and key drivers of HHS’ financial systems, mixed financial systems and associated IT infrastructure and
collaborate with the various executive sponsor-led cross-cutting teams. The executive sponsors of each of these
teams are accountable to the Risk Management and Financial Oversight Board to drive results and establish
effective operational controls to reduce risk.

2. Error Rate Measurement
HHS is limited with respect to corrective actions it can take to develop an error rate for TANF; however, when
legislation is considered to reauthorize TANF, HHS plans to encourage Congress to include changes that would
allow for a reliable error rate measurement.




Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 36
                                                                                 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




                            SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL STATEMENT AUDIT
                                          TABLE 1

     Audit Opinion                                           Unqualified for Four Financial Statements.
                                                             No Opinion Expressed on Statement of Social
                                                             Insurance and Statement of Changes in Social
                                                             Insurance Amounts

     Restatement                                             No


         Material             Beginning
                                                 New              Resolved       Consolidated       Ending Balance
        Weaknesses             Balance


     Financial
     Reporting,
                                   −               −                 −                −                     −
     Systems, Analyses
     & Oversight


     Financial
     Management
                                   1               −                 −                −                     1
     Information
     Systems


     Total Material
                                   1               0                 0                0                     1
     Weaknesses




                                          Definition of Terms – Tables 1 and 2

    Beginning Balance: The beginning balance shall agree with the ending balance of material weaknesses
    from the prior year.

    Resolved: The total number of material weaknesses that have dropped below the level of materiality in
    the current year.

    Consolidated: The combining of two or more findings.

    Reassessed: The removal of any finding not attributable to corrective actions (e.g., management has re-
    evaluated and determined a material weakness does not meet the criteria for materiality or is redefined
    as more correctly classified under another heading (e.g., Section 2 to a Section 4 and vice versa).

    Ending: The agency’s year-end balance.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                   FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 37
                                                                                  MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




                               SUMMARY OF MANAGEMENT ASSURANCES
                                            TABLE 2

                           Effectiveness of Internal Control over Financial Reporting (FMFIA #2)
Statement of Assurance                   Qualified

                                            Beginning                                                                Ending
       Material Weaknesses                   Balance     New       Resolved    Consolidated        Reassessed        Balance
Information System Controls and                 -          -           -              -                   1              1
Security

Total Material Weaknesses                      0           0           0             0                    1              1



                                Effectiveness of Internal Control over Operations (FMFIA #2)
Statement of Assurance                    Qualified

                                            Beginning                                                                Ending
       Material Weaknesses                   Balance     New       Resolved    Consolidated        Reassessed        Balance
Information System Controls and                1           -           -              -                   -              1
Security

Error Rate Measure                             1           -           -              -                   -              1

Total Material Weaknesses                      2           0           0             0                    0              2



                    Conformance with Financial Management System Requirements (FMFIA #4)
Statement of Assurance             Do not conform to financial management system requirements

                                            Beginning                                                                Ending
        Non-Conformances                     Balance     New       Resolved    Consolidated        Reassessed        Balance
Information System Controls and                1           -           -              -                   -              1
Security

Total Non-Conformances                         1           0           0             0                    0              1



                       Compliance with Federal Financial Management Improvement Act (FFMIA)
                                                    Agency                              Auditor
Overall Substantial Compliance                            No                                         No

1. System Requirements                                                Noncompliance Noted

2. Accounting Standards                                             No Noncompliance Noted

3. USSGL at Transaction Level                                         Noncompliance Noted




  Department of Health and Human Services                                                 FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 38
                                                                              MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS




                                   LOOKING AHEAD TO 2014
                            Management Challenges and High-Risk Areas
HHS is the United States Government’s principal agency for protecting the health of all Americans and providing
essential human services, especially for those who are least able to help themselves. Guided by the HHS Strategic
Plan, 2014 will be a critical year in enabling the Health Insurance Marketplaces to begin operations as well as many
other efforts in a number of exciting and challenging areas.

Strengthen Health Care

HHS is responsible for implementing many of the provisions included
in the Affordable Care Act which makes health insurance coverage
more secure and reliable for Americans, makes coverage more
affordable and accessible for families and small business owners, and
helps bring down health care costs. The Affordable Care Act also
expands consumer choice and supports informed decision-making
and increases health insurance coverage for low-income populations,
partly through the advent of Health Insurance Marketplaces, which
launched on October 1, 2013. Efforts in FY 2014 will include enrolling
individuals in the Marketplace and continued improvements to the
Healthcare.gov portal to enhance the customer experience. HHS is also committed to offering alternative
enrollment options to facilitate the application process and ensure that every American who wants to enroll in a
health insurance plan can access these new options for care.

HHS is also providing technical assistance to states that are transitioning to state-based Marketplaces. The
expansion of health insurance to individuals with behavioral health needs will require action to strengthen state
behavioral health systems, to disseminate the most effective evidence-based practices and provide quality training
to existing providers.

Efforts will continue to ensure access to quality, culturally competent care for vulnerable populations and the
population at large in many areas. This will include investments in health centers to provide increased access to
quality care in underserved areas, both rural and urban, with access to comprehensive primary and preventive
health care services. In addition, implementation of best practices to reduce health care associated infections and
investment to encourage and expand the meaningful use of health information technology will contribute to
overall efforts to ensure patient safety, promote efficiency and accountability, and reduce health care costs.

Advance Scientific Knowledge and Innovation

                   HHS is working to advance scientific knowledge and innovation to prevent, diagnose, and treat
                   diseases and disorders, address emerging health threats, and sustain a vital and cutting edge
                   workforce and scientific infrastructure. Future HHS plans include accelerating the development
                   of opportunities in substance use and abuse, research toward the treatment and prevention of
                   Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias, as well as HIV, and reverse the national epidemic of
                   obesity and diabetes.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 39
                                                                                MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS



Advance the Health, Safety and Well-Being of the American People

Over the next several years, HHS’ focus will align with the National Prevention
Strategy, which will create environments that promote healthy behaviors such
as preventing and reducing tobacco use, and implementing a 21st century food
safety system to reduce foodborne illness in the population. HHS will also help
Americans achieve and maintain healthy weight through school-based,
workplace-based, and community-based strategies.

HHS plans to continue investing in efforts to prevent and manage chronic               FDA's Emergency Operations
diseases and conditions, enhancing clinical efforts including childhood and adult      Center monitoring Hurricane
immunizations, threat detection and response, and supporting behavioral and            Sandy
primary health integration. This will serve to support overall public health as well as protect Americans’ health and
safety during emergencies, and foster resilience in response to emergencies.

                                   Continued partnering between HHS and state, local, tribal, urban Indian, and
                                   other service providers will sustain an essential safety net of services that
                                   protect children and youth, promote their emotional health and resilience in the
                                   face of adversity, and ensure their healthy development from birth through the
                                   transition to adulthood. Health and early intervention services ensure children
                                   get off to a good start from infancy. In support of this, HHS will maintain efforts
                                   to improve the quality of early childhood education for all children, and other
                                   efforts that will put children and youth on the path to successful futures.
 Response      teams      moving   Furthermore, by implementing evidence-based strategies in home visiting,
 supplies during Hurricane Sandy   foster care, and teen pregnancy prevention, HHS will ensure that this
population is given the chance to succeed in adulthood and can contribute to America’s success.

Ensure Efficiency, Transparency, Accountability, and Effectiveness

HHS will stay committed to developing effective systems, workforce, and infrastructure that can address
complicated and emerging challenges. These efforts will allow HHS to continue to towards its goal of improved
health and well-being among Americans. Specifically, HHS will continue its
evaluation efforts, including program integrity reviews to ensure compliance
with federal program integrity regulations, provide technical assistance and
identify areas to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Also, HHS will further
integrate strategic planning, program performance and integrity, and budget
management efforts to provide better and more efficient public service.

Recruiting, developing, retaining, and supporting a skilled and diverse workforce to provide effective and efficient
services and promote responsible stewardship will remain a priority. Currently, there are areas in the nation that
face shortages of critical health care workers, including primary care physicians, nurses, behavioral health and
long-term care workers, as well as public health and human service professionals. To address this, HHS will
continue to foster a 21st century workforce to deliver high-quality care, improve population health, and maximize
limited resources.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 40
                                                                              FINANCIAL SECTION




                                          FINANCIAL SECTION




Department of Health and Human Services                       FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 41
                                                                                                        FINANCIAL SECTION




                          MESSAGE FROM THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
                                   The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS or the Department) is one of
                                   the largest, most complex financial organizations in the world. This Agency
                                   Financial Report represents our accountability report for FY 2013. We will issue the
                                   FY 2013 Annual Performance Report, the FY 2015 Congressional Budget
                                   Justification and the Summary of Performance and Financial Information in
                                   February, 2014.

Through collaboration, our Chief Financial Officer (CFO) community manages financial accountability,
transparency, compliance and risk across the Department by maximizing resources to drive results. We are vigilant
in using taxpayer resources wisely to carry out the Department’s mission to enhance the health and well-being of
Americans.

During 2013, we continued in our role as stewards of the public trust and worked together collaboratively to
address our challenges. For example:

•   Our CFO executives continued to work together as a community to improve financial reporting and systems.
    We made significant progress to improve controls surrounding governance, oversight, and systems security,
    reflecting our continued management commitment to maintain full financial accountability, transparency and
    effective stewardship. As part of this effort, we worked together with the Chief Information Officer
    community to monitor and remediate corrective actions designed to reduce system and security risks. We
    continue work to monitor and reduce system and security risks.
•   Planned timeframes for correcting audit weaknesses and non-compliances can be found in the Management’s
    Discussion and Analysis section (see “Planned Action Plan and Impact of Material Weakness”).
•   We continued to refine our reporting processes and successfully performed our annual, internal control
    assessment as required by OMB Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control. We present
    the Secretary’s annual Statement of Assurance in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of this
    report, which reflects the results of our assessment and planned corrective actions.
•   We successfully launched release two of the Enterprise Financial Business Intelligence System which moved
    the Department towards improved reporting and management controls. This system provides a business
    analytics tool to users and management for strategic decision-making at the enterprise level.

This year we obtained a clean opinion on our Consolidated Balance Sheet, Statement of Net Cost, Statement of
Changes in Net Position and the Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources. However, the auditors did not audit
nor express an opinion on the Statement of Social Insurance and the Statement of Changes in Social Insurance
Amounts. These statements were developed using information from the 2013 Medicare Trustees Report, reflect
current law, and, are prepared in accordance with the standards issued by the Federal Accounting Standards
Advisory Board. Please refer to the Financial Section of this Agency Financial Report for further information.

I want to thank our employees and partners. This report and the accomplishments it describes, is a reflection of
their extraordinary dedication to our mission. Together, we look forward to further improving the Department’s
financial management capabilities.

/Ellen G. Murray/
Ellen G. Murray
Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources and
Chief Financial Officer
December 16, 2013


Department of Health and Human Services                                                 FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 42
                                                                                                            FINANCIAL SECTION




                              REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS




               TO:                The Secretary

                                  Through:            DS       __________
                                                      COS      __________
                                                      ES       __________


               FROM:              Inspector General


               SUBJECT:           OIG Report on the Financial Statement Audit of the Department of Health
                                  and Human Services for Fiscal Year 2013 (A-17-13-00001)


               This memorandum transmits the independent auditors’ reports on the Department of Health
               and Human Services (HHS) fiscal year (FY) 2013 financial statements, conclusions about the
               effectiveness of internal controls, and compliance with laws and other matters. The Chief
               Financial Officers Act of 1990 (P.L. No. 101-576), as amended, requires the Office of Inspector
               General (OIG) or an independent external auditor, as determined by OIG, to audit the HHS
               financial statements in accordance with applicable standards.

               We contracted with the independent certified public accounting firm of Ernst & Young, LLP, to
               audit the HHS (1) consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2013 and 2012, and the
               related consolidated statements of net cost and changes in net position; (2) the combined
               statement of budgetary resources for the years then ended; and (3) the statement of social
               insurance as of January 1, 2013, and the related statement of changes in social insurance
               amounts. The contract required that the audit be performed in accordance with auditing
               standards generally accepted in the United States of America; the standards applicable to
               financial audits contained in the Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller
               General of the United States; and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin 14-02,
               Audit Requirements for Federal Financial Statements.

               Results of the Independent Audit

               Based on its audit, Ernst & Young found that the FY 2013 HHS consolidated balance sheet and
               the related consolidated statements of net cost and changes in net position and combined
               statement of budgetary resources were presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity
               with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. As presented beginning in note 22 to the
               financial statements, with respect to the estimates for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
               Services (CMS) Social Insurance Program as of January 1, 2013 and 2012, CMS management




Department of Health and Human Services                                                     FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 43
                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL SECTION




                  Page 2 — The Secretary



                   has noted that actual future costs for Medicare are likely to exceed those projections estimated to
                  implement current law, including the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (P.L. No. 111-
                  148). The Medicare Board of Trustees, in their annual report to Congress, references an
                  alternative scenario to illustrate, when possible, the potential understatement of Medicare costs
                  and projection results. As a result, Ernst & Young was unable to obtain sufficient evidential
                  support for the amounts presented in the statements of social insurance as of January 1, 2013,
                  2012, 2011 and 2010, and the related statements of changes in social insurance amounts for the
                  periods ended January 1, 2013 and 2012, to enable them to express an opinion on whether the
                  statements were presented fairly. Ernst & Young provided unqualified opinions on the statement
                  of social insurance as of January 1, 2009.

                  Ernst & Young also noted two matters involving internal controls with respect to the financial
                  reporting. Under the standards established by the American Institute of Certified Public
                  Accountants and Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the
                  United States, Ernst & Young identified a material weakness in HHS’s financial information
                  management systems and a significant deficiency in its financial reporting systems, analyses, and
                  oversight:

                       •     Financial Information Management Systems—Ernst & Young noted that HHS had
                             continued to make strides to improve controls within the Information Technology
                             infrastructure that supports the financial application systems, although additional
                             improvements are still needed. HHS operating divisions continued to address and
                             implement the existing governance, financial process and practices, and system tools
                             needed to enhance controls over application information security and contingency
                             planning. HHS established a standard operating procedure and further implemented
                             automated tools to remediate segregation of duties conflicts among users. HHS also
                             established system-level contingency plans and backup policies and procedures to
                             improve redundancy and the availability of infrastructure that supports financial
                             application systems. As in previous fiscal years, Ernst & Young indicated a focused
                             effort is still needed to more completely remediate long outstanding deficiencies to a
                             level that supports an auditor’s reliance on controls within the financial systems.
                             Deficiencies were noted over controls related to segregation of duties, change
                             management, and access to HHS financial systems. The deficiencies found continue to
                             constitute a material weakness in internal control.

                       •     Financial Reporting Systems, Analyses, and Oversight—During the FY 2013 audit,
                             Ernst & Young noted continued progress in improving financial management processes.
                             While progress continued, HHS’s financial management systems were still not in
                             compliance with the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (P.L. No.
                             104-208). The audit identified internal control deficiencies that impact HHS’s ability to
                             report accurate financial information on a timely basis. Ernst & Young continued to
                             note that HHS lacks an integrated financial management system, which impairs HHS’s
                             and its operating divisions’ abilities to adequately support and analyze account balances
                             in a timely fashion. Ernst & Young also found certain controls were not consistently
                             performed and additional improvements were needed in financial reporting systems and
                             processes. During control testing over the Statement of Social Insurance, Ernst & Young




Department of Health and Human Services                                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   44
                                                                                                                 FINANCIAL SECTION




                  Page 3 — The Secretary



                             also noted policies and procedures regarding documentation were not always followed.
                             These deficiencies found collectively constitute a significant deficiency in internal
                             control.

                  Also, given the significant changes in programs effective January 1, 2014, related to the
                  continued implementation of the provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
                  that include the insurance exchanges, premium subsidies, risk corridors, and reinsurance
                  provisions, Ernst & Young also noted the importance of CMS’s and HHS’s developing
                  accounting policies and procedures early in FY 2014, including internal controls related to
                  significant processes to ensure that resources are properly utilized. In addition, Ernst & Young
                  also noted that CMS and HHS should analyze the impact of those provisions and establish the
                  appropriate accounting treatment in the financial statements.

                  Ernst & Young identified several instances of noncompliance with laws and other matters.
                  During FY 2013, HHS’s management identified that various operating divisions had violated
                  certain provisions of the Anti-Deficiency Act (P.L. No. 101-508) and OMB Circular A-11
                  related to compensation of time-limited employees appointed under section 207 (f) and 207 (g)
                  of the Public Health Services Act (42 U.S.C § 209 (f) and § 209 (g)). Also, HHS was not
                  currently in full compliance with the requirements of the Improper Payments Information Act of
                  2002 (P.L. No. 107-300), the Improper Payment Eliminations and Recovery Act of 2010 (P.L.
                  No. 111-204), and section 6411 of Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act related to the
                  implementation of recovery activities for the Medicare Advantage Program. As noted above,
                  Ernst & Young concluded that HHS also did not comply with the Federal Financial Management
                  Improvement Act of 1996.

                  Evaluation and Monitoring of Audit Performance

                  In accordance with the requirements of OMB Bulletin 14-02, we reviewed Ernst & Young’s
                  audit of the HHS financial statements by:

                       •     evaluating the independence, objectivity, and qualifications of the auditors and
                             specialists;

                       •     reviewing the approach and planning of the audit;

                       •     attending key meetings with auditors and HHS officials;

                       •     monitoring the progress of the audit;

                       •     examining audit documentation including those related to the review of internal controls
                             over financial reporting;

                       •     reviewing the auditors’ reports, and;

                       •     reviewing the HHS FY 2013 Agency Financial Report.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   45
                                                                                                               FINANCIAL SECTION




                  Page 4 — The Secretary



                  Ernst & Young is responsible for the attached reports and the conclusions expressed in those
                  reports. Our review, as differentiated from an audit in accordance with U.S. generally accepted
                  government auditing standards, was not intended to enable us to express, and accordingly we do
                  not express, an opinion on HHS’s financial statements, the effectiveness of internal controls,
                  whether financial management systems substantially complied with the Federal Financial
                  Management Improvement Act of 1996, or compliance with laws and regulations. However, our
                  monitoring review, as limited to the procedures listed above, disclosed no instances in which
                  Ernst & Young did not comply, in all material respects, with U.S. generally accepted government
                  auditing standards.

                  If you have any questions or comments about this report, please do not hesitate to call me, or
                  your staff may contact Gloria L. Jarmon, Deputy Inspector General for Audit Services, at
                  (202) 619-3155 or through e-mail at Gloria.Jarmon@oig.hhs.gov. Please refer to report
                  number A-17-13-00001.




                  Attachment

                  cc:
                  Ellen Murray
                  Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources
                   and Chief Financial Officer

                  Sheila Conley
                  Deputy Assistant Secretary, Finance
                   and Deputy Chief Financial Officer




Department of Health and Human Services                                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   46
                                                                                                                 FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                 Ernst & Young LLP           Tel: 703-747-1000
                                                 Westpark Corporate Center   www.ey.com
                                                 8484 Westpark Drive
                                                 McLean, VA 22102




                                                           Report of Independent Auditors

                  The Secretary and the Inspector General of the
                    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

                  Report on the Financial Statements

                  We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of the U.S. Department of
                  Health and Human Services (HHS) as of September 30, 2013 and 2012, and the related
                  consolidated statements of net cost and changes in net position, and the combined statements of
                  budgetary resources for the fiscal years then ended, the statements of social insurance as of
                  January 1, 2009, and the related notes to the financial statements. We were engaged to audit the
                  statements of social insurance as of January 1, 2013, 2012, 2011 and 2010, and the related
                  statements of changes in social insurance amounts for the periods ended January 1, 2013, 2012
                  and the related notes to these financial statements.

                  Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements

                  Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial
                  statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles; this includes the
                  design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair
                  presentation of financial statements that are free of material misstatement, whether due to fraud
                  or error.

                  Auditor’s Responsibility

                  Our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements based on our audits.
                  Except as discussed in the Basis for Disclaimer of Opinion paragraphs with respect to the
                  accompanying statements of social insurance as of January 1, 2013, 2012, 2011 and 2010, the
                  related statements of changes in social insurance amounts for the periods ended January 1, 2013
                  and 2012 and the related notes to these financial statements, we conducted our audits in
                  accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States, the standards
                  applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards, issued by the
                  Comptroller General of the United States, and Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
                  Bulletin No. 14-02, Audit Requirements for Federal Financial Statements. Those standards and
                  bulletin require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
                  the financial statements are free of material misstatement.

                  An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and
                  disclosures in the financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s
                  judgment, including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial
                  statements, whether due to fraud or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor

                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   47
                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                         Report of Independent Auditors
                                                                                                                Page 2


                  considers internal control relevant to HHS’ preparation and fair presentation of the financial
                  statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not
                  for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control.
                  Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness
                  of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by
                  management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements.

                  We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a
                  basis for our audit opinion on the consolidated balance sheets as of September 30, 2013 and
                  2012, and the related consolidated statements of net cost and changes in net position, and the
                  combined statements of budgetary resources for the fiscal years then ended, the statement of
                  social insurance as of January 1, 2009 and the related notes to these financial statements.

                  Basis for Disclaimer of Opinion on the Statements of Social Insurance and the related
                   Changes in the Social Insurance Program

                  As discussed in Note 22 to the financial statements, the statement of social insurance presents
                  the actuarial present value of the CMS’ Hospital Insurance (HI) and Supplementary Medical
                  Insurance (SMI) trust funds’ estimated future income to be received from or on behalf of the
                  participants and estimated future expenditures to be paid to or on behalf of participants during a
                  projection period sufficient to illustrate long-term sustainability of the social insurance program.
                  In preparing the statement of social insurance, management considers and selects assumptions
                  and data that it believes provide a reasonable basis for the assertions in the statement. Because
                  of the large number of factors that affect the statement of social insurance and the fact that
                  future events and circumstances cannot be known with certainty, there will be differences
                  between the estimates in the statement of social insurance and the actual results, and those
                  differences may be material. Projections of Medicare costs are sensitive to assumptions about
                  future decisions by policymakers and about the behavioral responses of consumers, employers,
                  and health care providers as policies, incentives, and the health care sector change over time. In
                  addition to the inherent variability that underlies the expenditure projections prepared for all
                  parts of Medicare, the SMI Part D projections have an added uncertainty in that they were
                  prepared using very little program data upon which to base the estimates, and as discussed
                  below, significant additional variability and issues regarding the sustainability of the underlying
                  assumptions under current law were introduced by the passage of the Patient Protection and
                  Affordable Care Act (ACA).

                  As further described in Note 23 to the financial statements, with respect to the estimates for the
                  CMS social insurance program presented as of January 1, 2013, 2012, 2011 and 2010,
                  management has reflected in the projections of the program the direct impact, but has not fully
                  reflected the secondary impacts of productivity adjustments (reductions in anticipated rates of
                  increase) indicated in the ACA and reductions in Medicare payment rates for physician services
                  mandated in current law. Management has noted that actual future costs for Medicare are likely
                  to exceed those shown by the current-law projections, and has developed illustrative alternative

                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   48
                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                         Report of Independent Auditors
                                                                                                                Page 3


                  scenarios and projections intended to provide additional context to users of the actuarial
                  estimates regarding the long-term sustainability of the social insurance program. In addition,
                  legislation mandating reductions in provider payments has in the past been overridden in whole
                  or in part by new legislation, including frequent adjustments to scheduled reductions in
                  physician payments and to prior efforts to adjust payments for inpatient hospital services. As a
                  result of these limitations, we were unable to obtain sufficient audit evidence for the amounts
                  presented in the statements of social insurance as of January 1, 2013, 2012, 2011 and 2010, and
                  the related statements of changes in social insurance amounts for the periods ended January 1,
                  2013 and 2012.

                  Disclaimer of Opinion on the Statements of Social Insurance and the related Changes in
                    the Social Insurance Program

                  Because of the significance of the matters described in the Basis for Disclaimer of Opinion
                  paragraphs, the scope of our work was not sufficient to enable us to express, and we do not
                  express, an opinion on the financial condition of the HHS social insurance program as of
                  January 1, 2013, 2012, 2011 and 2010, and the related changes in the social insurance program
                  for the periods ended January 1, 2013 and 2012.

                  Opinion

                  In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects,
                  the financial position of HHS as of September 30, 2013 and 2012, and its net cost, changes in
                  net position, and budgetary resources for the years then ended, and the financial condition of its
                  social insurance program as of January 1, 2009, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted
                  accounting principles.

                  Required Supplementary Information

                  U.S. generally accepted accounting principles require that the Management’s Discussion and
                  Analysis, Required Supplementary Stewardship Information, and Required Supplementary
                  Information as identified on HHS’ Agency Financial Report Table of Contents, be presented to
                  supplement the basic financial statements. Such information, although not a part of the basic
                  financial statements, is required by the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board, who
                  considers it to be an essential part of financial reporting for placing the basic financial
                  statements in an appropriate operational, economic or historical context. We have applied
                  certain limited procedures to the required supplementary information in accordance with
                  auditing standards generally accepted in the United States, which consisted of inquiries of
                  management about the methods of preparing the information and comparing the information for
                  consistency with management’s responses to our inquiries, the basic financial statements, and
                  other knowledge we obtained during our audit of the basic financial statements. We do not
                  express an opinion or provide any assurance on the information because the limited procedures
                  do not provide us with sufficient evidence to express an opinion or provide any assurance.

                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   49
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                        Report of Independent Auditors
                                                                                                               Page 4


                  Other Financial Information and Other Information

                  Our audit was conducted for the purpose of forming opinions on the financial statements that
                  collectively comprise HHS’ basic financial statements. The Other Financial Information, as
                  identified on HHS’ Agency Financial Report Table of Contents, is presented for purposes of
                  additional analysis and is not a required part of the basic financial statements.

                  The Other Financial Information is the responsibility of management and was derived from and
                  relates directly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the basic
                  financial statements. Such information has been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in
                  the audit of the basic financial statements and certain additional procedures, including
                  comparing and reconciling such information directly to the underlying accounting and other
                  records used to prepare the basic financial statements or to the basic financial statements
                  themselves, and other additional procedures in accordance with auditing standards generally
                  accepted in the United States. In our opinion, the Other Financial Information is fairly stated, in
                  all material respects, in relation to the basic financial statements as a whole.

                  The Other Information has not been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of
                  the basic financial statements, and, accordingly, we do not express an opinion or provide any
                  assurance on it.

                  Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards

                  In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we also have issued our reports dated
                  December 16, 2013, on our consideration of HHS’ internal control over financial reporting and
                  on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws and regulations and other matters.
                  The purpose of those reports is to describe the scope of our testing of internal control over
                  financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion
                  on the internal control over financial reporting or on compliance. Those reports are an integral
                  part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering
                  HHS’ internal control over financial reporting and compliance.

                                                                                  /Ernst & Young LLP/


                  December 16, 2013




                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   50
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                 Ernst & Young LLP           Tel: 703-747-1000
                                                 Westpark Corporate Center   www.ey.com
                                                 8484 Westpark Drive
                                                 McLean, VA 22102




                     Report of Independent Auditors on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
                       Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed in Accordance With
                                           Government Auditing Standards
                  The Secretary and the Inspector General of the
                    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

                  We have audited, in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States
                  and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
                  issued by the Comptroller General of the United States and Office of Management and Budget
                  (OMB) Bulletin No. 14-02, Audit Requirements for Federal Financial Statements, the financial
                  statements of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS or the Department),
                  which comprise the consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2013, and the related
                  consolidated statements of net cost and changes in net position, and the combined statement of
                  budgetary resources for the fiscal year then ended, and the related notes to the financial
                  statements, and we were engaged to audit the statement of social insurance as of January 1,
                  2013, and the related statement of changes in social insurance amounts for the period ended
                  January 1, 2013, and have issued our report thereon dated December 16, 2013. That report
                  states that because of the matters described in the Basis for Disclaimer of Opinion paragraphs,
                  the scope of our work was not sufficient to enable us to express, and we do not express, an
                  opinion on the statement of social insurance as of January 1, 2013, and the related statement of
                  changes in social insurance amounts for the period ended January 1, 2013.

                  Internal Control over Financial Reporting

                  In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered HHS’ internal
                  control over financial reporting (internal control) to determine the audit procedures that are
                  appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the financial
                  statements, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of HHS’
                  internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the HHS’
                  internal control. We limited our internal control testing to those controls necessary to achieve
                  the objectives described in OMB Bulletin No. 14-02. We did not test all internal controls
                  relevant to operating objectives as broadly defined by the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity
                  Act of 1982 (FMFIA), such as those controls relevant to ensuring efficient operations.

                  A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
                  management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to
                  prevent, or detect and correct misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a
                  deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control such that there is a reasonable
                  possibility that a material misstatement of the entity’s financial statements will not be
                  prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency,
                  or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe than a material weakness,
                  yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with governance.

                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   51
                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                             Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                 Page 2


                  Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph
                  of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be
                  material weaknesses or significant deficiencies and, therefore, material weaknesses or
                  significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified. Given these limitations, during our
                  audit, we did identify certain deficiencies related to Financial Information Management
                  Systems, described below, to be a material weakness. We also identified certain deficiencies
                  related to Financial Reporting Systems, Analyses, and Oversight, described below, to be a
                  significant deficiency.

                  Material Weakness

                  Financial Information Management Systems

                  DHHS continued to make strides during fiscal year (FY) 2013 to improve the controls within its
                  supporting information technology (IT) infrastructure and financial application systems. We
                  noted attention amongst the operating divisions (OPDIVs) to address the existing governance,
                  financial processes and practices, and system tools related to controls over application
                  information security, and contingency planning for financial systems. The following
                  summarizes some of the improvements achieved that resulted from this increased attention.

                     •    Established a standard operating procedure and practices to facilitate remediation and
                          further implementation of automated tools, reports, and review mechanisms to prevent
                          and remediate segregation of duties (SoD) conflicts among users.

                     •    Established system-level contingency plans, backup policies and procedures that align to
                          the continuity of operations plan (COOP) and consistent testing practices in order to
                          improve redundancy and availability of the supporting IT infrastructure and financial
                          application systems.

                  Additionally, the Department has obtained an Agency Authorization to Operate (ATO) utilizing
                  a FedRAMP-accredited Third-Party Assessor Organization (3PAO) for the Amazon Web
                  Services (AWS) GovCloud, which is used by GrantSolutions.

                  A focused effort is still necessary to more completely remediate the long-outstanding
                  deficiencies to a level that supports an auditor’s reliance on controls within these systems for the
                  financial statement audit. Plans were indicated to be in place by management to decrease the
                  number and severity of the deficiencies remaining in the other significant systems, including the
                  two primary general ledger applications – Unified Financial Management System (UFMS) and
                  NIH Business System (NBS). Specifically, we believe there will be a positive impact from the
                  successful completion of these efforts in these areas.




                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   52
                                                                                                                     FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                              Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                  Page 3


                  The remaining un-remediated deficiencies continue to constitute a material weakness in internal
                  control. These deficiencies fall into the following categories:

                     •    Segregation of Duties – efforts necessary include:

                          – completely implementing role-based security

                          – establishment of least privileged access considerations for all users, and

                          – performance of a onetime clean-up activities for roles in conflict,

                     •    Change management – which consists of:

                          – implementation of automated mechanisms to support change management activities

                          – verification that changes were not made that did not go through the change approval
                            and management process.

                  The following is a summary of the deficiencies that we considered most critical. When assessed
                  in aggregate, we continue to conclude they could have a material effect on the financial
                  statements and as a result this forms the basis for our conclusion of an IT material weakness:

                     •    Segregation of Duties – GrantSolutions (GS), UFMS, NBS, IMPACII, Health and
                          Human Services Consolidated Acquisitions Solution (HCAS), Grants Administration
                          Tracking and Evaluation System (GATES), and Enterprise Human Resources & Payroll
                          (EHRP) systems did not document and implement adequate segregation of duties. Process
                          Owners have not completely identified segregation of duty conflicts that can exist for
                          GATES, GS, NBS, IMPACII, and EHRP and the roles and users with these conflicts. In
                          addition, UFMS, and EHRP applications, developer(s) had full access to both
                          development and production system. CMS continues to experience difficulties in
                          implementing its policy of least privilege access, preventing and monitoring for
                          inconsistencies in access rights to various systems, and mitigating the potential impact on
                          adequate segregation of duties. We found several deficiencies that may result in a
                          potential lack of segregation of duties at both the Medicare fee-for-service contractors and
                          across the enterprise.

                     •    Change Management – CM processes for NBS, HCAS, GATES, GS, and EHRP were
                          insufficient to ensure only properly authorized changes were implemented into
                          production systems. We also found that GATES baseline configuration is not documented
                          for the application and database levels. Some CMS applications did not have adequate
                          segregation of duties as it relates to implementing new program code. In addition, the
                          documentation for authorization, testing, and approval of changes was not retained.


                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   53
                                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                               Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                   Page 4


                          Several vulnerabilities in system configurations, program coding, input validation, and
                          incident response procedures were observed for the Medicare fee-for-service network.

                     •    Access Controls – Access controls exceptions were identified across the UFMS, HCAS,
                          GATES, GS, EHRP and CFRS systems. Specifically, proactive user access reviews and
                          subsequent actions that were needed to be performed were not done in a timely manner.
                          Additionally, for HCAS and UFMS, certain users were certifying their own access and
                          evidence of access modifications performed as a part of the certification were not
                          documented. At CMS, we noted that business users for one key application were able to
                          increase their access capabilities, such as maintaining system codes and the system
                          configuration files. Additionally, we noted inconsistent and inappropriate access was
                          granted to certain users for several key applications at CMS, in some cases without a
                          business justification, resulting in the risk of incorrectly configured user profiles and
                          potentially unauthorized changes to Medicare financial data files and programs.

                     •    FISMA compliance – The security management program, as required by the Federal
                          Information Security Management Act (FISMA) of 2002, provides a framework to ensure
                          that security threats are identified, risks are assessed, control objectives are appropriately
                          designed and formulated, relevant control techniques are developed and implemented,
                          and managerial oversight is consistently applied to provide for the overall effectiveness of
                          security measures. Without a fully integrated security management program, the design
                          and implementation of security controls may be inadequate; user roles and responsibilities
                          may be unclear; and management, operational and technical controls may be
                          inconsistently implemented. Such conditions will lead to insufficient protection of
                          sensitive or critical resources. As a part of our FY13 FISMA assessment, we performed
                          our procedures at the following OPDIVs: (1) Indian Health Service (IHS), (2) U.S. Food
                          and Drug Administration, (3) National Institutes of Health (NIH), (4) Centers for
                          Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), and (5) HHS Office of the Secretary. Our
                          procedures identified the following deficiencies identified across the OPDIVs reviewed:

                          – Patch Management – The OPDIVs assessed do not have an effective process for
                            timely implementation of critical system patches.

                          – Identity and Access Management – Based on the OPDIVs assessed, the Department
                            needs to standardize identification and access management procedures to provision,
                            recertify and de-provision user accounts.

                          – Remote Access Management – Based on the OPDIVs assessed, the Department has
                            not fully implemented adequate security controls over remote access to the HHS
                            networks. We found deficiencies related to policies and procedures and VPN user
                            account maintenance.



                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   54
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                            Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                Page 5


                          – Plan of Action and Milestones – The assessed OPDIVs’ security management has
                            not fully implemented an effective POA&M process to ensure that all fields for
                            each POA&M record are entered and updated on a timely basis and that all
                            POA&M records are resolved and closed in a timely manner.

                  Recommendations

                  DHHS should continue the focus achieved in FY 2013 to remediate the remaining deficiencies.
                  The following are some specific considerations:

                     •    Continue to identify, assess, modify, and monitor Access Controls, Configuration
                          Management, and SoD to further enhance the security posture of all applications. Specific
                          recommendations for the non-CMS OPDIV applications include:

                          – Develop and implement procedures to monitor, review and investigate user access
                            to include users with known SOD conflicts in a timely manner. Additionally, ensure
                            that all reviews and modifications/removal of access or other actions performed as a
                            result of the review process are documented in a timely manner.

                          – Continue to review and verify that user access to critical financial applications is
                            properly granted and to recertify or remove access on a periodic basis. In addition,
                            password controls should be implemented consistent with DHHS policy.

                          – For GATES/GS, ACF management should consistently implement the GATES and
                            GS SOD matrices and monitor compliance to ensure that access to each system is
                            granted in accordance with the SOD matrix and commensurate with user’s job roles
                            and responsibilities.

                          – For UFMS, HCAS, EHRP, NBS, and IMPACII, management should develop a plan
                            to implement controls for identifying, documenting, and monitoring segregation of
                            duties conflicts within the change management process. SoD conflicts should be
                            considered when granting access to the development, test, and production
                            environments in order to limit the number of users with conflicting access to only
                            those users that require access specifically for their job function, including business
                            justification for any allowable conflicts. Additionally, management should
                            segregate all access to both the development and production environments for any
                            single user.

                          – Continue to test, track, and authorize all system changes planned for released into
                            the production environment. Management should periodically review the list of
                            changes made in the production environment and confirming that the changes made
                            have gone through the formal change management process and that only authorized
                            changes were implemented into the production environment.

                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   55
                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                             Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                 Page 6


                     •    We have performed a separate financial statement audit of CMS for FY 2013 and, in
                          conjunction with our reports on that audit, have provided recommendations specific to
                          CMS on our IT internal control findings. Those findings and recommendations were
                          considered in our overall HHS conclusions.

                     •    Throughout the course of this year’s audit, we noted a handful of DHHS applications, to
                          include GATES and EHRP, were going to be retired in the near future and replaced by
                          other internal systems or other Governmental centers of excellence. However, a focused
                          effort should still be made to remediate weaknesses identified across all systems currently
                          in operation, including systems that will be retired in the coming years, so as to mitigate
                          risk and exposure to exploitation.

                  Significant Deficiency

                  Financial Reporting Systems, Analyses, and Oversight

                  During FY 2013, our audit identified further progress as HHS continued to implement new
                  processes, upgrade its various legacy systems, improve communication, develop new guidance,
                  hire new experienced personnel, and provide training to address significant long-standing
                  issues. We noted further improvements in controls within the payroll, intragovernmental and
                  Fund Balance with Treasury reconciliation processes. However, HHS’ and its OPDIVs’ internal
                  reviews and the results of our testing of internal control continued to identify internal control
                  deficiencies in financial systems and processes for producing financial statements, including
                  lack of integrated financial management systems and insufficient analysis of certain significant
                  accounts. In many cases, the progress noted above and related processes continued to be
                  developed throughout FY 2013 and will require additional refinements in FY 2014. Within the
                  context of the approximately $900 billion in departmental net outlays, the ultimate resolution of
                  our specific 2013 findings were not material to the financial statements taken as a whole.
                  However, these matters are indicative of systemic issues that must continue to be resolved.

                  Lack of Integrated Financial Management System

                  In FY 2004, HHS began its implementation of a commercial web-based, off-the-shelf
                  accounting system product modified to replace five legacy accounting systems and numerous
                  subsidiary systems with one modern accounting system with three components. The three
                  components include:

                     •    HIGLAS – developed to support the financial activities of the CMS and its Medicare
                          contractors by integrating the CMS contractors’ standard claims processing systems and
                          CMS’ mainframe-based financial system with a web-based accounting system.




                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   56
                                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                               Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                   Page 7


                     •    NBS – developed to support the financial activities at NIH. NIH completed certain
                          aspects of its implementation in FY 2008 and continues to add more ancillary modules in
                          the succeeding years.

                     •    UFMS – developed to support the financial activities at the remaining OPDIVs with full
                          implementation completed in FY 2008. Certain processes to refine the implementation
                          and address systemic issues are ongoing.

                  The Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA) requires Federal
                  agencies to have an integrated financial management system that provides effective and
                  efficient interrelationships between software, hardware, personnel, procedures, controls, and
                  data contained within the systems and compliance with the United States Standard General
                  Ledger (USSGL) at the transaction level and applicable Federal accounting standards. The lack
                  of an integrated financial management system continues to impair HHS’ and its OPDIVs’
                  abilities to adequately support and analyze account balances reported in a timely fashion.
                  Although progress continues to be achieved, HHS’ financial management systems are not yet
                  compliant with the FFMIA. Specific deficiencies noted include the following:

                     •    Although significant progress was made with the automation of certain transactions,
                          including intradepartmental delegations of authority (IDDAs), during FY 2013, over
                          11,000 manual journal vouchers (JVs) in excess of $1.6 trillion in absolute value were
                          required to be recorded in UFMS and NBS to post certain types of transactions –
                          including transactions to record certain proprietary and budgetary entries, record accruals,
                          perform adjustments between governmental and nongovernmental accounts, perform
                          adjustments to agree budgetary to proprietary accounts, perform other reconciliation
                          adjustments at period-end, and correct errors identified related to configuration issues
                          within UFMS and NBS. These entries are postings to UFMS and NBS to record both the
                          proprietary and budgetary effects of certain financial activities for which the financial
                          system may not be configured properly to post automatically. Although these entries are
                          required to be posted to the general ledger in order for the financial statements to be
                          accurate and internal controls over manual vouchers were found to be operating
                          effectively, including supervisory reviews and properly maintained documentation to
                          support each entry, many of these entries should be configured as routine systematic
                          entries within the systems. HHS’ management indicated that it continues to develop and
                          implement corrective actions to reduce the number of manual entries in future years. For
                          NBS financial statement closing entries, although the entry is recorded in NBS for
                          financial statement preparation purposes, the entry may be recorded in aggregate and
                          reversed until such time that either the routine process captures the activity or the entries
                          are carried forward to the next reporting period.

                     •    As discussed in further detail above, reviews of general and application controls over
                          financial management systems identified certain departures from requirements specified


                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   57
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                            Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                Page 8


                          in OMB Circulars A-127, Financial Management Systems, and A-130, Management of
                          Federal Information Resources.

                     •    Within a decentralized complex organization like HHS, an integrated financial system
                          with strong internal controls is required for up-to-date accurate financial information
                          needed for certain decision-making responsibilities. Many of the OPDIVs within HHS
                          have their own financial management systems with individual data structures.
                          Accordingly, accurate information needed for decision-making at all levels of the
                          organization may not be readily available on a day-to-day or even monthly basis as
                          required by FFMIA. With the implementation of CFRS, certain program, financial, and
                          budgetary consolidated and OPDIV information is pulled into a common system on a
                          quarterly basis; however, more timely and standard information is necessary to respond to
                          congressional requests and for decision-making purposes. In certain cases, the department
                          is required to use surveys or data calls to the OPDIVs or to the specified programs to
                          obtain information for specific requests. Management indicated that with the expansion of
                          certain aspects of CFRS and its continued implementation of the Financial Business
                          Intelligence System, which started in FY 2012, it is working to improve upon its readily
                          available information to support information analysis and to address potential requests
                          from Congress, OMB, the President, and other entities.

                     •    Certain subsidiary systems are not fully integrated with the Unified Financial
                          Management System (UFMS) and are not complemented by sufficient manual
                          preventative and detective type controls. HHS continues to resolve certain system issues
                          within the National Institutes of Health’s (NIH) Business System (NBS). As a result,
                          although progress was made in FY 2013, NIH’s NBS continues to have certain
                          transactions which are captured incorrectly as compared to the Treasury Standard General
                          Ledger at the transaction level and require adjustments to the accounting records.
                          Additionally, CMS continues its efforts to implement a web-based accounting system, the
                          Healthcare Integrated General Ledger Accounting System (HIGLAS), which integrates
                          the reporting of financial data related to the CMS contractors’ standard claims processing
                          systems. HIGLAS is the system of record and CMS is preparing financial statements
                          using HIGLAS, however, the full functionality of HIGLAS may not have been
                          implemented yet. The Medicare Administrative Contractors’ (MACs) accounts receivable
                          balances are recorded at Central Office through the manual journal voucher process. In
                          addition, the creation of the periodic financial statements is largely system dependent;
                          however, there is a need for system interventions to properly categorize the information
                          within the financial statements, as required by OMB A-136. Finally, the durable medical
                          equipment (DME) MACs have not implemented HIGLAS. For these contractors, the
                          accuracy of the financial reports remains heavily dependent on inefficient, labor-
                          intensive, manual processes that are also subject to an increased risk of inconsistent,
                          incomplete or inaccurate information being submitted to CMS.



                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   58
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                            Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                Page 9


                  Resource limitations and other priorities were noted as causes for delays in upgrading certain
                  system and financial internal control processes limiting HHS’ ability to comply with
                  requirements under FFMIA. HHS will need to continue to review its available resources as
                  resources become even more restrained with (1) potential further budget cuts expected in future
                  years, (2) the continued implementation of the Government-wide Treasury Account Symbol
                  Adjusted Trial Balance System (GTAS) and (3) the continued implementation of new laws,
                  regulations, and policies.

                  Financial Analysis and Oversight

                  Because deficiencies continue to exist in the financial management systems, management must
                  compensate for the deficiencies by implementing and strengthening additional controls to
                  ensure that errors and irregularities are detected in a timely manner. Our review of internal
                  control disclosed a series of deficiencies that impact HHS’ ability to report accurate financial
                  information on a timely basis. Consistent with prior years, we found that certain controls were
                  not consistently performed to ensure differences were properly identified, researched, and
                  resolved in a timely manner, and that account balances were complete and accurate. We noted
                  the following items in the current year’s audit that indicate additional improvements in the
                  financial reporting systems and processes are required:

                  Department/Operating Division Periodic Analysis and Reconciliation

                  When deficiencies exist in financial systems, as discussed above, management must
                  compensate by implementing and strengthening other manual controls to ensure that errors and
                  irregularities are prevented or detected in a timely manner. These manual and compensating
                  controls would include monitoring of budgets, reconciliations of accounts, analyses of
                  fluctuations, aging of accounts, and manual and supervisory reviews. During our audit, we
                  found that certain controls still required further improvements. The following represent specific
                  areas we noted that need enhanced periodic reconciliation and analysis procedures:

                     •    Departmental Review of OPDIV Financial Statements – We noted that although desk
                          officers have been assigned the responsibility of reviewing specific OPDIV financial
                          reporting, the desk officers do not consistently review the supporting documentation to
                          ensure that the submissions are accurate or fully supported. In our review of the OPDIV
                          and Department-level draft financial statements, we identified approximately $1.2 billion
                          in differences that could not be identified or were not identified on a timely basis and
                          inconsistencies in disclosures reported within the AFR. Further, we found that certain
                          OMB and Treasury required submissions contained mistakes that were ultimately
                          identified through controls and edit checks located outside of HHS. For example, for the
                          fourth quarter Intergovernmental Reporting submission, HHS had reported $2.8 billion
                          against an incorrect trading partner which was identified when the Treasury system
                          performed the match between agencies.


                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   59
                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                             Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                               Page 10


                     •    Property, Plant and Equipment – We found that sufficient documentation was not readily
                          available to support certain amounts and disclosures related to property, plant and
                          equipment. Additionally, we noted that certain assets that were purchased in prior years
                          and put into service were not recorded to the accounting records until fiscal year 2013.
                          Finally, we noted differences (1) between the property subsidiary ledgers and the amounts
                          reported on the financial statements and (2) when the operating division rolled forward its
                          beginning balances to balances reported at year-end.

                  Policies and Procedures

                  During our internal control documentation and testing phases, we noted that, although various
                  internal control processes had been changed or updated, the Department had not completed its
                  updating of procedural manuals to ensure sufficient knowledge of financial management
                  systems/processes or consistency and adequacy of internal control exist. Additionally, we noted
                  that HHS utilizes several different means of providing guidance to its personnel; however, the
                  guidance is located at different intranet locations and may be at different stages of updating,
                  thus, making it very confusing for the personnel to locate the most updated guidance. It is our
                  understanding that the Department and its OPDIVs are currently updating all financial
                  management procedures.

                  Further, as part of the accounting centers’ monthly processes, the Department has instituted a
                  policy whereby the accounting centers certify the status of completing required periodic
                  reconciliations. For each required reconciliation, the preparer and approver sign off and provide
                  a date of completion. On a monthly basis, the document is forwarded to the Department. No
                  supporting documentation is required to be provided as part of the submission. Our review of
                  the OPDIVs’ submissions and the supporting documentation maintained at the OPDIVs
                  identified inconsistencies in the procedures performed, the reports utilized, and the results
                  provided among the various OPDIVs. Additionally, we noted that although the financial
                  statements are submitted to OMB on the 21st day after the end of the quarter, the Department’s
                  policy did not require reconciliations to be completed and certified until the end of the month.

                  Finally, given the significant changes in programs effective January 1, 2014, related to the
                  continued implementation of the provisions of the ACA (for example, the insurance exchanges,
                  premium subsidies, risk corridors, re-insurance provisions), it is important that HHS and CMS
                  develop accounting policies and procedures early in FY 2014, including internal controls related
                  to the significant processes to ensure that the resources are properly utilized. In addition, HHS
                  and CMS should analyze the impact of the provisions and establish the appropriate accounting
                  treatment in the financial statements.

                  Medicaid Oversight

                  The Medicaid program is the primary source of medical assistance for low-income Americans.
                  Medicaid operates as a partnership between the states and the Federal government. The Federal

                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   60
                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                           Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                             Page 11


                  government establishes the minimum requirements and provides oversight for the program and
                  the states design, implement, administer and oversee their own Medicaid programs within the
                  Federal parameters. In general, states pay for the health benefits provided, and the Federal
                  government in turn matches qualified state expenditures based on the Federal medical
                  assistance percentage. The Federal government controls over Medicaid expenditures were
                  designed assuming that the states would have their own set of procedures and controls over
                  program costs and that the states would have an incentive to enforce compliance with their
                  procedures and controls to protect the integrity of their own program costs as well as the
                  expenditures shared by the Federal government.

                  In recent years, as CMS has separately identified and reconciled the states’ annual funds, there
                  has been an increase in the number of adjustments, which have become more difficult to resolve
                  timely, highlighting the weaknesses of their oversight of the program expenditures. As of
                  September 30, 2013, a $1.9 billion accounts receivable and a $1.6 billion accounts payable
                  balance were recorded in the CMS financial statements related to the Medicaid program, some
                  of which dates back to FY 2009 and prior. In FY 2013, CMS has established a protocol to
                  address negative balances and implemented review procedures to compare the quarterly
                  expenditures, budgeted grant awards and quarterly draws. Although the FY 2012 grant
                  finalizations were performed more consistently and timely for the states in 2013, our analyses of
                  this process still identified deficiencies in the Medicaid program.

                  CMS has been working on a multi-year project to define data and analytics to improve its
                  program and financial management. That program is not operational at a level that it currently
                  provides controls supporting program integrity. CMS should continue to enhance its financial
                  management systems and its related data analyses capability to develop robust analytical
                  procedures and measures against benchmarks to monitor and identify risks associated with the
                  Medicaid program, including outliers and unusual or unexpected results that may identify
                  abnormalities in state-related Medicaid expenditures.

                  Financial Management Controls at CMS

                  We performed a separate audit of the financial statements of CMS and reported on the results of
                  our audit, including a report on its internal controls dated December 9, 2013. In that report, we
                  outlined details of deficiencies noted and made recommendations for improvement in their
                  financial management controls. Consistent with our findings in the previous year, we concluded
                  that the aggregation of these deficiencies and those related to Medicaid oversight, business
                  partner risk management, and Statement of Social Insurance (SOSI) noted elsewhere in this
                  report to be a significant deficiency for the CMS internal control over financial reporting. Our
                  observations related to financial management controls included:

                     •    CMS failed to timely record, report and return to Treasury approximately $2.2 billion in
                          unobligated borrowing authority for the Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan (CO-OP)
                          program as of September 30, 2012. Although CMS identified the error in January 2013,

                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   61
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                            Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                              Page 12


                          the unobligated borrowing authority was not identified and returned to Treasury timely.
                          In addition, the unobligated borrowing authority was not reported correctly in the FACTS
                          II submission to Treasury for fiscal year 2012. In this example, CMS had not
                          implemented appropriate controls around the evaluation of the final amounts of
                          unobligated authority required to be recorded, reported and returned to Treasury.

                     •    As CMS continues to enhance its data analyses capability, further improvement can be
                          made by developing robust analytical procedures or measures against benchmarks to
                          monitor and mitigate risks associated with the decentralized nature of CMS operations.
                          To the extent more robust analysis occurs within Centers and Offices, identifying,
                          evaluating and reviewing such analysis would assist in ensuring that a perspective that
                          incorporates a financial reporting point of view is captured and considered. It may be
                          beneficial for CMS to identify a cross-functional working group to perform such analysis,
                          for example: (i) identify and document the reasons behind the changes in program
                          expenditures and (ii) corroborating analysis between the changes in Medicare Part C and
                          Part D beneficiaries and the changes in the monthly plan payments.

                  Business Partner Risk Management at CMS

                  CMS relies heavily on third-party contractors as it outsources substantially all the day-to-day
                  operations for its information technology systems, the payment of Medicare fee-for-service and
                  Medicaid claims and certain services related to the Medicare Part C and Part D programs. We
                  continued to identify areas where improvements could be made in the control environment
                  related to the oversight of third-party contractors.

                  The contracts between CMS and its Medicare fee-for-service contractors include provisions that
                  require the Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) to develop and follow objectives
                  established by CMS. Through the established procedures, the MACs are required to (a)
                  periodically certify to the completeness and accuracy of the financial information transmitted;
                  (b) document specific objectives and maintain supporting documentation for review and audit;
                  and (c) provide monthly shared system reports and related support for recorded amounts.
                  Through its OMB Circular No. A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control
                  (A-123), Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 16, Reporting on Controls at
                  a Service Organization, (SSAE 16), and regional office processes, CMS monitors the MACs’
                  compliance with its policies and procedures, established controls and the accuracy of financial
                  reporting.

                  While this approach to financial integrity supports monitoring of the MACs’ financial controls,
                  the oversight/monitoring process has not been fully effective in identifying and resolving
                  financial recording and reporting issues or ensuring that the issues are timely remediated by the
                  MACs. During our audit activities, we identified deficiencies relating to: (1) the claims
                  completeness validation process between the claims submitted by the providers and the claims
                  received by the MACs; (2) the Medicare Summary Notices which are returned to the MACs and

                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   62
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                            Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                              Page 13


                  are not investigated, as to why they are returned, as there currently is no existing CMS policy
                  that addresses the actions in this circumstance; (3) the claims outstanding greater than one year,
                  as there is no policy or procedure in place to periodically review, track or monitor those aged
                  claims; and (4) the provider records as there are no procedures in place to reconcile, review and
                  monitor provider records, and eligibility status on a periodic basis to verify that all changes
                  were timely, accurately and completely processed.

                  Statements of Social Insurance

                  The Statements of Social Insurance (SOSI) for CMS presents a long-term projection of the
                  present value of the benefits to be paid for the closed and open groups of existing and future
                  participants of the Medicare social insurance programs less the inflows to be received from or
                  on behalf of those same individuals.

                  The SOSI models are complex, 75-year projections that contain a high degree of estimation.
                  The models and their results are heavily reviewed by actuaries and others within CMS. The
                  veracity of the underlying data remains critical to the accuracy of the model. In recognition of
                  the importance of the underlying data, CMS has developed and implemented a change
                  management process over the SOSI model, which applies to significant changes or changes in
                  the methodology of each model. In addition, CMS’ policies and procedures require that the
                  input or output data within the SOSI model are documented to properly understand the flow of
                  the data. During our control testing, we noted that one significant change made to a model and a
                  few instances where the input and output data within the models were not properly documented
                  in accordance with the policy.

                  Recommendations

                  We recommend that HHS continue to develop and refine its financial management systems and
                  processes to improve its accounting, analysis, and oversight of financial management activity.
                  Specifically, we recommend that HHS:

                     •    Continue to devise short-term and long-term resolutions to systematic and integration
                          issues that complicate use of UFMS and NBS. HHS should continue to assess whether
                          systems used to prepare the financial statements are working effectively and have been
                          sufficiently tested prior to year-end reporting dates.

                     •    Continue to offer updated guidance to personnel to ensure consistent application of
                          policies among the various Operating Divisions and Headquarters.

                     •    Continue to advance management initiatives to streamline the processes for responding to
                          financial information requests through implementation of the Enterprise Federal Business
                          Intelligence System and IT system consolidation or standardization to more effectively


                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   63
                                                                                                                     FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                              Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                Page 14


                          utilize CFRS to provide for more timely and up-to-date financial and business
                          information.

                     •    Perform specific and high-level analysis, including the corroboration of the results, over
                          the Medicaid account balances and related expenditures. In addition, the accounts
                          receivable and payable Medicaid balances should be analyzed and validated through the
                          use of a subsidiary ledger.

                     •    Challenge whether the newly implemented protocol and detect controls address the
                          underlying root cause of why states continue to have negative balances within their PMS
                          subaccounts. Evaluate the current protocol and determine if additional procedures and
                          controls should be implemented to continuously monitor the state Medicaid draws and
                          perform grant oversight activities to ensure that the states deposit the funds back after a
                          deferral is issued and report timely, accurately, and consistently on the funds drawn to
                          both CMS and PMS. In addition, CMS should encourage the states to reconcile the FFR,
                          CMS-64 and PMS subaccounts on a timely manner so that they can perform the grant
                          close out process timely and consistently within PMS to eliminate any erroneous draws to
                          grant awards with remaining authority.

                     •    CMS should strengthen the Medicaid program oversight controls that will serve to
                          prevent, detect and resolve errors timely and to deter fraud, waste and abuse of Federal
                          government resources. With respect to state-operated programs, CMS should perform
                          additional oversight and analysis procedures related to the state costs.

                     •    Establish a process to perform a claims-level detailed look-back analysis on the Medicaid
                          EBDP to determine the reasonableness of the methodology utilized to record the
                          approximately $27.6 billion accrual.

                     •    Establish a policy individual or group to analyze the accounting and reporting of unique,
                          non-routine or significant transactions, enhance the financial reporting process, address or
                          identify transactions that required cross-functional input as well as to develop robust
                          analytical procedures or measures against benchmarks to monitor and mitigate risks
                          associated with the decentralized nature of CMS operations. Enhancement of this process
                          may assist to develop, document and validate the new critical accounting matters that are
                          identified during the year and improve the timeliness, accuracy and completeness of the
                          white papers. Prepare required presentations and disclosures to ensure adequate time for
                          analysis and feedback from key stakeholders. The internal controls and financial reporting
                          implications of the significant provisions of ACA that commence in fiscal year 2014
                          require management’s attention and may need to be addressed prior to formalizing further
                          changes to the white paper process.




                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   64
                                                                                                                     FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                              Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                Page 15


                     •    Continue to develop and implement policies and procedures within the budget and
                          financial reporting process to ensure that the unobligated authority required to be returned
                          to Treasury is determined and finalized timely.

                     •    Revise and enhance the design of the financial review guidance provided to the various
                          Centers, regional offices and MACs to incorporate more analyses and scrutiny in the
                          review of the financial information.

                     •    Improve the contingent liability process to ensure that sufficient documentation is
                          maintained to support or corroborate management’s conclusions and to evidence that the
                          controls are operating effectively and as designed.

                     •    Consider expediting the CERT, PERM, Part C and Part D error rate development,
                          analysis, and reporting so that a more thorough analysis of the findings and plans for
                          remediation can be completed prior to the required reporting deadline. Error rate results
                          should be developed at a sufficient level of detail to analyze specific causes, scrutinize
                          contributing factors and identify anomalies to begin investigations of the root causes of
                          the errors and prevention, mitigation and recovery plans.

                     •    Continue to adhere to established policies and procedures to ensure that the SOSI model
                          methodology and related calculation and estimates are consistently documented.
                          Adherence to these policies will ensure that the model is evaluated to verify that the
                          input/output data is appropriate based on the expected results of the data and spreadsheet
                          changes and the model is accurate and complete.

                  Additionally, we recommend that CMS continue to develop and refine its financial management
                  controls and business partner risk management as a means to improve its accounting, analysis
                  and oversight of financial management activity. More detailed recommendations related to our
                  specific findings on these topics are included in our CMS Report on Internal Control.




                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   65
                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                                                           Report on Internal Control
                                                                                                                             Page 16


                  Status of Prior-Year Findings

                  In the reports on the results of the FY 2012 audit of the HHS financial statements, a number of
                  issues were raised relating to internal control over financial reporting. The chart below
                  summarizes the current status of the prior-year items:

                                                                   Material Weakness
                         Issue Area                           Summary Control Issue                      FY 2013 Status
                  Financial Management                •    Non-CMS OPDIV Financial            Certain progress noted; certain issues
                  Information Systems                      Management Information             need continued focus. Modified
                                                           Systems                            Repeat Condition
                                                      •    Non-CMS OPDIV Application
                                                           Security Management
                                                      •    CMS Information Systems
                                                           Controls
                                                                   Significant Deficiency
                  Financial Reporting                 •    Lack of Integrated Financial       Certain progress noted, including
                  Systems, Analyses, and                   Management System                  improvements within the payroll,
                  Oversight                                                                   intra-governmental and Fund Balance
                                                      •    Financial Analysis and Oversight   with Treasury Reconciliation areas.
                                                      •    Statement of Social Insurance      However, certain issues identified
                                                                                              require continued focus. Modified
                                                                                              Repeat Condition

                  HHS’ Response to Findings

                  HHS’ response to the findings identified in our audit and examination are included in its letter
                  dated December 16, 2013, which has been included at the end of this report. HHS’ response
                  was not subjected to either the auditing procedures applied in the audit of the financial
                  statements or the attest procedures applied in the examination of internal control and,
                  accordingly, we express no opinion on it.

                  Purpose of this Report

                  The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and
                  the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the entity’s internal control. This
                  report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing
                  Standards in considering the entity’s internal control. Accordingly, this communication is not
                  suitable for any other purpose.

                                                                                                /Ernst & Young LLP/


                  December 16, 2013


                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   66
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                 Ernst & Young LLP           Tel: 703-747-1000
                                                 Westpark Corporate Center   www.ey.com
                                                 8484 Westpark Drive
                                                 McLean, VA 22102




                   Report of Independent Auditors on Compliance and Other Matters Based on an
                    Audit of the Financial Statements Performed in Accordance With Government
                                                 Auditing Standards

                  The Secretary and the Inspector General of the
                    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

                  We have audited, in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States
                  and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
                  issued by the Comptroller General of the United States and the Office of Management and
                  Budget (OMB) Bulletin No. 14-02, Audit Requirements for Federal Financial Statements, the
                  financial statements of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), which comprise
                  the consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2013, and the related consolidated
                  statements of net cost and changes in net position and the combined statements of budgetary
                  resources for the fiscal year then ended, and the related notes to the financial statements, and we
                  were engaged to audit the statement of social insurance as of January 1, 2013, and the related
                  statement of changes in social insurance amounts for the period ended January 1, 2013, and
                  have issued our report thereon dated December 16, 2013. That report states that because of the
                  matters described in the Basis for Disclaimer of Opinion paragraphs, the scope of our work was
                  not sufficient to enable us to express, and we do not express, an opinion on the statement of
                  social insurance as of January 1, 2013, and the related statement of changes in social insurance
                  amounts for the period ended January 1, 2013.

                  Compliance and Other Matters

                  As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether HHS’ financial statements are free of
                  material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws and
                  regulations, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect on the
                  determination of financial statement amounts, and certain other laws and regulations specified
                  in OMB Bulletin No. 14-02, including the requirements referred to in the Federal Financial
                  Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA) (P.L.104-208). However, providing an
                  opinion on compliance with certain provisions of laws and regulations was not an objective of
                  our audit and, accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. We limited our tests of
                  compliance to these provisions, and we did not test compliance with all laws and regulations
                  applicable to HHS.

                  The results of our tests of compliance with the laws and regulations described in the second
                  paragraph of this report disclosed instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required
                  to be reported under Government Auditing Standards and OMB Bulletin No. 14-02, as
                  described below.



                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   67
                                                                                                                              FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                  Report of Independent Auditors on Compliance and Other Matters
                                                                                                                         Page 2


                  During fiscal year (FY) 2013, HHS’ management determined that various operating divisions
                  had violated certain provisions of the Anti-Deficiency Act (P.L. 101-508 and OMB Circular
                  A-11) related to compensation of time-limited employees appointed under sections 207(f) and
                  207(g) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. § 209(f) and § 209(g), respectively.

                  Additionally, the Improper Payments Information Act (IPIA) of 2002 (P.L. 107-300) as
                  amended by the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act (IPERA) of 2010 (P.L.
                  111-204) and the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act (IPERIA) of
                  2013 (P.L. 112-248) (hereinafter the “Acts”) require federal agencies to identify the program
                  and activities that may be susceptible to significant improper payments and estimate the amount
                  of the improper payments. While it continues to make progress, HHS is currently not in full
                  compliance with the requirements of the Acts. HHS has reported error rates for each of its high-
                  risk programs, or components of such programs, except for the Temporary Assistance for
                  Needy Families (TANF); and the Medicare Fee-For-Service error rate is greater than the
                  statutorily required maximum of 10 percent. As for improper payment estimates in the TANF
                  program, HHS indicated that it is unable to compel states to collect the necessary information
                  required to conduct an improper payment measurement due to Section 411 of the Social
                  Security Act which specifies the data elements that HHS may require states to report and
                  Section 417 of the same Act dictates that the federal government may only regulate the conduct
                  of states where Congress has given them the express authority. Accordingly, HHS feels that it
                  does not have the authority to collect data pertaining to case and payment accuracy for TANF
                  since the information is not included under the Act. In addition, HHS is not in full compliance
                  with Section 6411 of the Affordable Care Act as HHS has not yet implemented recovery
                  activities of the identified improper payments for the Medicare Advantage (Part C) program. To
                  date, HHS has received and analyzed comments related to a Part C recovery audit contractor
                  program, continues to explore implementation options and anticipates executing a contract in
                  FY 2014.

                  Under FFMIA, we are required to report whether HHS’ financial management systems
                  substantially comply with federal financial management systems requirements, applicable
                  federal accounting standards, and the United States Standard General Ledger (USSGL) at the
                  transaction level. To meet this requirement, we performed tests of compliance with FFMIA
                  Section 803(a) requirements. The results of our tests disclosed instances in which HHS’
                  financial management systems did not substantially comply with certain requirements as
                  discussed above. We have identified the following instances of noncompliance related to
                  FFMIA:

                     •    Certain subsidiary systems are not fully integrated with the Unified Financial
                          Management System (UFMS) and are not complemented by sufficient manual
                          preventative and detective type controls. HHS continues to resolve certain system issues
                          within the National Institutes of Health’s (NIH) Business System (NBS). As a result,
                          although progress was made in FY 2013, NIH’s NBS continues to have certain
                          transactions which are captured incorrectly as compared to the Treasury Standard General

                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                       FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   68
                                                                                                                              FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                  Report of Independent Auditors on Compliance and Other Matters
                                                                                                                         Page 3


                          Ledger at the transaction level and require adjustments to the accounting records.
                          Additionally, although CMS has determined its Healthcare Integrated General Ledger
                          Accounting System (HIGLAS) to be substantially compliant with FFMIA, the Medicare
                          Administrative Contractors’ (MACs) accounts receivable balances are being recorded at
                          Central Office through the manual journal voucher process. In addition, the creation of
                          the periodic financial statements is largely system dependent; however, there is a need for
                          system interventions to properly categorize the information within the financial
                          statements, as required by OMB A-136. Finally, the durable medical equipment (DME)
                          MACs have not implemented HIGLAS. For these contractors, the accuracy of the
                          financial reports remains heavily dependent on inefficient, labor-intensive, manual
                          processes that are also subject to an increased risk of inconsistent, incomplete or
                          inaccurate information being submitted to CMS.

                     •    During fiscal year 2013, thousands of manual journal vouchers were required to be
                          recorded in UFMS/NBS to post certain types of transactions, including budgetary and
                          proprietary, not currently configured correctly within UFMS and for the purpose of
                          developing monthly financial statements.

                     •    Certain reconciliations and clearance of differences are not completed timely due to the
                          use of ad hoc inquiries and system limitations on matching debits and credits to resolve
                          certain issues.

                     •    Although progress was noted, reviews of general and application controls over financial
                          management systems identified certain departures from requirements specified in OMB
                          Circulars A-127, Financial Management Systems, and A-130, Management of Federal
                          Information Resources. Additionally, the Office of Inspector General (OIG) identified
                          certain issues, including access control deficiencies related to systems as part of its
                          Federal Information Security Management Act and other OIG engagements. Finally,
                          HHS management has identified certain weaknesses within its information technology
                          general and application controls during its assessment of corrective action status and its
                          OMB A-123 processes.

                     •    Currently, accurate information needed for decision-making at all levels of the
                          organization may not be readily available on a day-to-day or even monthly basis as
                          required by FFMIA. HHS is currently working on implementing the Enterprise Financial
                          Business Intelligence System (FBIS) to provide access to more timely information to
                          support decision-making.

                                                                       *****




                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                       FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   69
                                                                                                                              FINANCIAL SECTION




                                                                  Report of Independent Auditors on Compliance and Other Matters
                                                                                                                         Page 4


                  HHS’ Response to Findings

                  Our Report on Internal Control dated December 16, 2013, includes additional information
                  related to the financial management systems that were found not to comply with the
                  requirements, relevant facts pertaining to the noncompliance to FFMIA, and our
                  recommendations related to the specific issues presented. It is our understanding that
                  management agrees with the facts as presented and that relevant comments from HHS’
                  management responsible for addressing the noncompliance are provided in their letter dated
                  December 16, 2013. We did not audit management’s comments and, accordingly, we express
                  no opinion on them. Additionally, HHS is updating its agency-wide corrective action plan to
                  address FFMIA and other financial management issues.

                  Purpose of this Report

                  The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of compliance and the
                  results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on HHS’ compliance. This report is an
                  integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in
                  considering HHS’ compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any other
                  purpose.


                                                                                            /Ernst & Young LLP/


                  December 16, 2013




                  A member firm of Ernst & Young Global Limited




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                       FY 2013 Agency Financial Report   70
                                                                                                       FINANCIAL SECTION




  DEPARTMENT’S RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS




         To:       Daniel R. Levinson, Inspector General


         From:     Ellen G. Murray, Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources and Chief Financial Officer


         Subject: FY 2013 Financial Statement Audit


         We would like to thank the Office of Inspector General and your contractors, Ernst & Young LLP,
         for your efforts on our behalf. We appreciate the professionalism exhibited by your staff and
         contractors during the audit.

         We appreciate the opportunity to comment on the draft reports provided to us. We generally
         concur with the findings in the Final Report which has been included in this FY 2013 Agency
         Financial Report. In response to your reports, we will prepare corrective action plans to address
         the identified findings within the next 60 days.

         HHS management is committed to working toward resolving these challenges. We look forward
         to continued collaboration with the Office of Inspector General to improve our stewardship of
         taxpayer funds.




         /Ellen G. Murray/

         Ellen G. Murray
         Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources and
         Chief Financial Officer
         December 16, 2013




Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 71
                                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION




                                            PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                                         U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                                                  Consolidated Balance Sheet
                                                       As of September 30, 2013 and 2012
                                                                   (in Millions)
                                                                                                               2013                   2012
   Assets (Note 2)
     Intragovernmental Assets:
           Fund Balance with Treasury (Note 3)                                                             $     159,192        $        197,348
           Investments, Net (Note 4)                                                                             281,723                 306,381
           Accounts Receivable, Net (Note 5)                                                                          3,649                    820
           Advances (Note 8)                                                                                           103                      48
     Total Intragovernmental Assets                                                                              444,667                 504,597


     Accounts Receivable, Net (Note 5)                                                                            10,933                     10,943
     Inventory and Related Property, Net (Note 6)                                                                     8,602                   8,072
     General Property, Plant and Equipment, Net (Note 7)                                                              5,364                   5,401
     Advances (Note 8)                                                                                                  34                    1,244
     Other Assets                                                                                                      655                     396
   Total Assets                                                                                            $     470,255        $        530,653
   Stewardship Property, Plant and Equipment (Note 1)


   Liabilities (Note 9)
      Intragovernmental Liabilities
           Accounts Payable                                                                                $           565      $             659
           Other Liabilities (Note 13)                                                                                2,009                   1,430
     Total Intragovernmental Liabilities                                                                              2,574                   2,089


     Accounts Payable                                                                                                  662                     425
     Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable (Note 10)                                                               77,277                     72,493
     Accrued Grant Liability (Note 12)                                                                                3,949                   3,748
     Federal Employee and Veterans’ Benefits (Note 11)                                                            11,566                     11,008
     Contingencies and Commitments (Note 14)                                                                          8,900                   6,766
     Other Liabilities (Note 13)                                                                                      2,581                   2,962
   Total Liabilities                                                                                             107,509                     99,491


   Net Position
     Unexpended Appropriations - Funds from dedicated collections (Note 21)                                           4,469                  20,418
     Unexpended Appropriations - Other funds                                                                     105,728                 135,768
     Unexpended Appropriations, Total                                                                            110,197                 156,186


     Cumulative Results of Operations - Funds from dedicated collections (Note 21)                               243,996                 267,009
     Cumulative Results of Operations - Other funds                                                                   8,553                   7,967
     Cumulative Results of Operations, Total                                                                     252,549                 274,976
   Total Net Position                                                                                            362,746                 431,162
   Total Liabilities and Net Position                                                                      $     470,255        $        530,653




The accompanying “Notes to the Principal Financial Statements” are an integral part of these statements.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 72
                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL SECTION



                                           U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                                                 Consolidated Statement of Net Cost
                                               For the Years Ended September 30, 2013 and 2012
                                                                  (in Millions)




                                                                                                                2013                  2012
Responsibility Segments
     Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
                Gross Cost                                                                                  $      848,967       $       802,301
                Exchange Revenue (Note 16)                                                                        (69,745)               (65,078)
                       CMS Net Cost of Operations                                                                  779,222               737,223
     Other Segments:
     Administration for Children and Families (ACF)                                                                    50,566                49,143
     Administration for Community Living (ACL)                                                                          1,449                 1,488
     Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)                                                                   606                   635
     Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)                                                                  10,771                10,380
     Food and Drug Administration (FDA)                                                                                 3,394                 3,250
     Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)                                                                8,720                 8,653
     Indian Health Service (IHS)                                                                                        5,551                 6,726
     National Institutes of Health (NIH)                                                                               30,691                31,834
     Office of the Secretary (OS)                                                                                       3,900                 3,684
     Program Support Center (PSC)                                                                                       1,636                 1,774
     Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)                                                 3,432                 3,480
                Other Segments Gross Cost of Operations before Actuarial Gains and Losses                   $      120,716       $       121,047
                      Actuarial (Gains) and Losses Commissioned Corp Retirement and
                      Medical Plan (Note 11)                                                                             230                   497
                Other Segments Gross Cost of Operations after Actuarial Gains and Losses                    $      120,946       $       121,544
                Exchange Revenue (Note 16)                                                                         (3,918)                (3,220)
                      Other Segments Net Cost of Operations                                                        117,028               118,324
Net Cost of Operations (Note 16)                                                                            $      896,250       $       855,547




 The accompanying “Notes to the Principal Financial Statements” are an integral part of these statements.



 Department of Health and Human Services                                                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 73
                                                                                                                                       FINANCIAL SECTION



                                    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                                   Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net Position
                                                   For the Year Ended September 30, 2013
                                                                 (in Millions)

                                                                                                             2013

                                                                Funds From Dedicated
                                                                                              All Other Funds       Eliminations       Consolidated Total
                                                                    Collections
Cumulative Results of Operations:
Beginning Balances                                                  $            267,009      $            7,967    $              -     $        274,976
Budgetary Financing Sources:
  Appropriations Used                                                            247,682               397,158                     -              644,840
  Non-exchange Revenue
     Non-exchange Revenue - Tax Revenue                                          213,106                        -                  -              213,106
     Non-exchange Revenue - Investment Revenue                                    12,051                      3                    -               12,054
     Non-exchange Revenue - Other                                                  4,761                        -                  -                4,761
  Donations and Forfeitures of Cash and Cash Equivalents                              50                        -                  -                   50
  Transfers-in/out without Reimbursement                                          (3,363)                  2,313                   -               (1,050)
  Other (+/-)                                                                           -                     4                    -                    4
Other Financing Sources (Non-Exchange):
  Donations and Forfeitures of Property                                                 -                     7                    -                    7
  Transfers-in/out Without Reimbursement (+/-)                                        (2)                    (5)                   -                   (7)
  Imputed Financing                                                                   37                    687             (189)                     535
  Other (+/-)                                                                          1                   (478)                   -                 (477)
Total Financing Sources                                                          474,323               399,689              (189)                 873,823
Net Cost of Operations (+/-)                                                     497,336               399,103              (189)                 896,250
Net Change                                                                      (23,013)                    586                    -              (22,427)


Cumulative Results of Operations:                                   $            243,996      $            8,553    $              -     $        252,549


Unexpended Appropriations:
Beginning Balances                                                  $             20,418      $        135,768      $              -     $        156,186


Budgetary Financing Sources:
     Appropriations Received                                                     249,300               401,316                     -              650,616
     Appropriations Transferred in/out                                                  -                   120                    -                  120
     Other Adjustments                                                          (17,567)               (34,318)                    -              (51,885)
     Appropriations Used                                                       (247,682)              (397,158)                    -             (644,840)
     Total Budgetary Financing Sources                                          (15,949)               (30,040)                    -              (45,989)
Total Unexpended Appropriations                                                    4,469               105,728                     -              110,197
Net Position                                                        $            248,465      $        114,281      $              -     $        362,746




The accompanying “Notes to the Principal Financial Statements” are an integral part of these statements.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 74
                                                                                                                                         FINANCIAL SECTION



                                     U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                                    Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net Position
                                                    For the Year Ended September 30, 2012
                                                                  (in Millions)


                                                                                                               2012
                                                                Funds From Dedicated
                                                                                            All Other Funds           Eliminations        Consolidated Total
                                                                    Collections
Cumulative Results of Operations:
Beginning Balances                                                    $         293,362      $             7,807        $            -     $         301,169
Budgetary Financing Sources:
  Appropriations Used                                                           231,390               376,985                        -               608,375
  Non-exchange Revenue
     Non-exchange Revenue - Tax Revenue                                         205,006                        -                     -               205,006
     Non-exchange Revenue - Investment Revenue                                   13,890                       2                      -                13,892
     Non-exchange Revenue - Other                                                  3,417                       -                     -                 3,417
  Donations and Forfeitures of Cash and Cash Equivalents                              47                       -                     -                    47
  Transfers-in/out without Reimbursement                                         (3,637)                   2,232                     -                (1,405)
  Other (+/-)                                                                          -                      1                      -                     1
Other Financing Sources (Non-Exchange):
  Donations and Forfeitures of Property                                                -                      6                      -                     6
                Transfers-in/out Without Reimbursement (+/-)                         (3)                      2                      -                    (1)
  Imputed Financing                                                                   35                    633                 (158)                    510
  Other (+/-)                                                                          -                   (494)                     -                 (494)
Total Financing Sources                                                         450,145               379,367                   (158)                829,354
Net Cost of Operations (+/-)                                                    476,498               379,207                   (158)                855,547
Net Change                                                                      (26,353)                    160                      -               (26,193)


Cumulative Results of Operations:                                     $         267,009       $            7,967        $            -     $         274,976


Unexpended Appropriations:
Beginning Balances                                                    $            4,236     $        122,558           $            -     $         126,794


Budgetary Financing Sources:
     Appropriations Received                                                    250,966               398,108                        -               649,074
     Appropriations Transferred in/out                                                 -                      9                      -                     9
     Other Adjustments                                                           (3,394)               (7,922)                       -               (11,316)
     Appropriations Used                                                       (231,390)            (376,985)                        -             (608,375)
     Total Budgetary Financing Sources                                           16,182                13,210                        -                29,392
Total Unexpended Appropriations                                                  20,418               135,768                        -               156,186
Net Position                                                          $         287,427      $        143,735           $            -     $         431,162




The accompanying “Notes to the Principal Financial Statements” are an integral part of these statements.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 75
                                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL SECTION



                                                 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                                                  Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources
                                                      For the Years Ended September 30, 2013 and 2012
                                                                         (in Millions)
                                                                                                         2013                                             2012
                                                                                                             Non-Budgetary                                    Non-Budgetary
                                                                                                             Credit Reform                                     Credit Reform
                                                                                       Budgetary           Financing Account              Budgetary         Financing Account
Budgetary Resources:
Unobligated Balance, Brought Forward, Oct 1                                        $          80,780            $       3,175         $        51,730          $           71
Recoveries of Prior Year Unpaid Obligations                                                   24,598                          -                25,746                        -
Other Changes in Unobligated Balance                                                          (1,221)                       (1)                (4,524)                        -
Unobligated Balance from Prior Year Budget Authority, Net                                    104,157                     3,174                 72,952                       71
Appropriations (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                               1,193,733                          -             1,191,860                         -
Borrowing Authority (Discretionary and Mandatory) (Note 17)                                         -                  (2,064)                       -                   3,194
Spending Authority from Offsetting Collections (Discretionary and Mandatory)                  25,409                     (685)                 20,122                    1,636
Total Budgetary Resources                                                          $       1,323,299            $         425         $     1,284,934          $        4,901

Status of Budgetary Resources:
Obligations Incurred (Note 18)                                                     $       1,281,722            $         314         $     1,204,154          $        1,726
  Unobligated Balance, End of Year:
Apportioned                                                                                    29,993                      40                  71,919                    3,134
Exempt from Apportionment                                                                       2,059                        -                    184                        -
Unapportioned                                                                                   9,525                      71                   8,677                       41
Total Unobligated Balance, End of Year                                                         41,577                     111                  80,780                    3,175
Total Budgetary Resources                                                          $       1,323,299            $         425         $     1,284,934          $        4,901

Change in Obligated Balance:
Unpaid Obligations:
Unpaid Obligations, Brought Forward, Oct 1                                         $          180,754           $       1,602         $       188,534          $             -
Obligations Incurred (Note 18)                                                              1,281,722                      314               1,204,154                   1,726
Outlays (Gross)                                                                           (1,249,330)                    (668)             (1,186,188)                   (124)
Actual Transfers, unpaid obligations                                                               106                       -                        -                       -
Recoveries of Prior Year Unpaid Obligations                                                   (24,598)                       -                 (25,746)                       -
Unpaid Obligations, End of Year                                                    $          188,654           $       1,248         $       180,754          $        1,602

Uncollected Payments:
Uncollected Customer Payments from Federal Sources, Brought Forward, Oct 1         $         (10,103)           $     (1,587)         $       (10,360)         $             -
Change in Uncollected Customer Payments from Federal Sources                                    (915)                   1,051                      257                 (1,587)
Uncollected Payments from Federal Sources, End of Year                             $         (11,018)           $       (536)         $       (10,103)         $       (1,587)
Memorandum (non-add) Entries:
Obligated Balance, Start of Year                                                   $         170,651            $          15         $       178,174          $             -
Obligated Balance, End of Year                                                     $         177,636            $         712         $       170,651          $           15

Budget Authority and Outlays, Net:
Budget Authority, Gross (Discretionary and Mandatory)                              $       1,219,142            $     (2,749)         $     1,211,982          $        4,830
Actual Offsetting Collections (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                  (24,812)                   (366)                 (20,291)                    (48)
Change in Uncollected Customer Payments from Federal Sources
  (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                                                (915)                    1,051                     257                  (1,587)
Budget Authority, Net (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                $       1,193,415            $     (2,064)         $     1,191,948          $       3,195

Outlays, Gross (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                       $       1,249,330            $         668         $     1,186,188          $          124
Actual Offsetting Collections (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                  (24,812)                    (366)                (20,291)                    (48)
Outlays, Net (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                                 1,224,518                       302              1,165,897                       76
Distributed Offsetting Receipts                                                            (336,655)                         -               (317,777)                       -
Agency Outlays, Net (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                  $         887,863            $         302         $       848,120          $           76


The accompanying “Notes to the Principal Financial Statements” are an integral part of these statements.




         Department of Health and Human Services                                                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 76
                                                                                                                                                               FINANCIAL SECTION



                                                     U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                                                             Statement of Social Insurance
                                                  75-Year Projection as of January 1, 2013 and Prior Base Years
                                                                            (in Billions)

                                                                                                                                       Estimates from Prior Years
                                                                                                  (unaudited)        (unaudited)       (unaudited) (unaudited)
                                                                                                       2013               2012               2011           2010                     2009
Actuarial present value for the 75-year projection period of estimated future income
(excluding interest) received from or on behalf of: (Notes 22 and 23)
Current participants who, in the starting year of the projection period:
  Have not yet attained eligibility age
                HI                                                                                    $     8,147       $     7,929       $     7,581          $    7,216      $      6,348
                SMI Part B                                                                                 15,227            14,431            13,595              12,688            16,323
                SMI Part D                                                                                  5,871             5,866             6,438               6,355             6,144
  Have attained eligibility age (age 65 and over)
                HI                                                                                            301               302               262                  248              209
                SMI Part B                                                                                  2,620             2,395             2,122                1,972            1,924
                SMI Part D                                                                                    722               694               695                  646              595
  Those expected to become participants
                HI                                                                                          7,744             7,367             7,260                6,944            5,451
                SMI Part B                                                                                  3,530             3,333             3,223                3,077            4,909
                SMI Part D                                                                                  2,617             2,568             2,817                2,714            2,632
  All current and future participants
                HI                                                                                         16,192            15,598            15,104              14,408            12,008
                SMI Part B                                                                                 21,377            20,159            18,940              17,737            23,156
                SMI Part D                                                                                  9,211             9,128             9,950               9,715             9,371
Actuarial present value for the 75-year projection period of estimated future
expenditures for or on behalf of: (Notes 22 and 23)
Current participants who, in the starting year of the projection period:
   Have not yet attained eligibility age
                HI                                                                                       $ 14,629       $    14,919       $    12,887       $      12,032      $     18,147
                SMI Part B                                                                                 15,075            14,303            13,489              12,587            16,342
                SMI Part D                                                                                  5,871             5,866             6,438               6,355             6,144
   Have attained eligibility age (age 65 and over)
                HI                                                                                          3,422             3,369             2,923                2,648            2,958
                SMI Part B                                                                                  2,887             2,646             2,343                2,166            2,142
                SMI Part D                                                                                    722               694               695                  646              595
   Those expected to become participants
                HI                                                                                          2,913             2,891             2,546                2,411            4,673
                SMI Part B                                                                                  3,415             3,211             3,108                2,984            4,672
                SMI Part D                                                                                  2,617             2,568             2,817                2,714            2,632
  All current and future participants
                HI                                                                                         20,963            21,179            18,356              17,090            25,778
                SMI Part B                                                                                 21,377            20,159            18,940              17,737            23,156
                SMI Part D                                                                                  9,211             9,128             9,950               9,715             9,371
Actuarial present value for the 75-year projection period of estimated future excess
of income (excluding interest) over expenditures (Notes 22 and 23)
                HI                                                                                   $     (4,772)      $   (5,581)       $    (3,252)      $      (2,683)     $ (13,770)
                SMI Part B                                                                                       -                -                  -                   -              -
                SMI Part D                                                                                       -                -                  -                   -              -

Additional Information
Actuarial present value for the 75-year projection period of estimated future excess
of income (excluding interest) over expenditures (Notes 22 and 23)
                HI                                                                                   $     (4,772)      $   (5,581)       $    (3,252)      $      (2,683)     $ (13,770)
                SMI Part B                                                                                       -                -                  -                   -              -
                SMI Part D                                                                                       -                -                  -                   -              -
Trust Fund assets at start of period
                HI                                                                                            220               244               272                  304             321
                SMI Part B                                                                                     66                80                71                   76              59
                SMI Part D                                                                                      1                 1                 1                    1               1
Actuarial present value for the 75-year projection period of estimated future excess
of income (excluding interest) and Trust Fund assets at start of period over
expenditures (Notes 22 and 23)
                HI                                                                                   $     (4,551)      $   (5,337)       $    (2,980)     $       ( 2,378)    $ (13,449)
                SMI Part B                                                                                      66               80                 71                   76            59
                SMI Part D                                                                                       1                1                  1                    1             1


Please note for the entirety of the Statement of Social Insurance:
               Totals do not necessarily equal the sum of the rounded components.
               Current participants are assumed to be the “closed group” of individuals who are at least age 15 at the start of the projection period and are participating in the
                    program as either taxpayers, beneficiaries or both.
The accompanying “Notes to the Principal Financial Statements” are an integral part of these statements.




     Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 77
                                                                                                                                                        FINANCIAL SECTION



                                                     U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                                                       Statement of Social Insurance (Continued)
                                                  75-Year Projection as of January 1, 2013 and Prior Base Years
                                                                            (in Billions)

                                                                                                                                       Estimates from Prior Years
                                                                                                   (unaudited)     (unaudited)      (unaudited)    (unaudited)
                                                                                                        2013            2012             2011            2010                  2009
Medical Social Insurance Summary
Current Participants:
Actuarial present value for the 75-year projection period from or on behalf of:
Those who, in the starting year of the projection period, have attained eligibility age:
        Income (excluding interest)                                                                  $    3,643      $     3,391          $    3,079     $    2,866      $     2,729
        Expenditures                                                                                      7,031            6,709               5,961          5,459            5,695
      Income less expenditures                                                                           (3,388)          (3,319)             (2,882)        (2,593)          (2,967)
Those who, in the starting year of the projection period, have not yet attained eligibility age:
       Income (excluding interest)                                                                       29,244           28,227              27,615         26,259           28,815
       Expenditures                                                                                      35,574           35,088              32,814         30,974           40,634
         Income less expenditures                                                                        (6,330)          (6,861)             (5,199)        (4,715)         (11,819)
Actuarial present value of estimated future income (excluding interest) less Expenditures
(closed-group measure)                                                                                   (9,718)         (10,180)             (8,081)        (7,308)         (14,786)
Combined Medicare Trust Fund assets at start of period                                                       288              325                 344            381              381
Actuarial present value of estimated future income (excluding interest) less Expenditures
                                                                                                         (9,430)          (9,855)             (7,737)        (6,927)         (14,405)
plus Trust Fund assets at start of period


Future Participants:
Actuarial present value for the 75-year projection period:
        Income (excluding interest)                                                                      13,891           13,268              13,300         12,735           12,991
        Expenditures                                                                                      8,945            8,669               8,471          8,109           11,976
        Income less expenditures                                                                          4,946            4,599               4,829          4,626            1,016


Open-Group (all current and future participants):
Actuarial present value of estimated future income (excluding interest) less expenditures                (4,772)          (5,581)             (3,252)        (2,683)         (13,770)
Combined Medicare Trust Fund assets at start of period                                                      288              325                 344            381              381

Actuarial present value of estimated future income (excluding interest) less expenditures
                                                                                                    $    (4,484)    $     (5,256)     $       (2,908)    $   (2,302)     $ (13,390)
plus Trust Fund assets at start of period




Please note for the entirety of the Statement of Social Insurance:
       Totals do not necessarily equal the sum of the rounded components.
       Current participants are assumed to be the “closed group” of individuals who are at least age 15 at the start of the projection period and are participating in
                 the program as either taxpayers, beneficiaries or both.
The accompanying “Notes to the Principal Financial Statements” are an integral part of these statements.



        Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                     FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 78
                                                                                                                                          FINANCIAL SECTION



                                  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                           Statement of Changes in Social Insurance Amounts (unaudited)
                                      For the Two Year Period Ending September 30, 2013
                                     Medicare Hospital and Supplementary Medical Insurance
                                                           (in Billions)

                                                                   Actuarial present value over the next 75 years                            Actuarial present
                                                                               (open group measure)                                         value of estimated
                                                                                                                          Combined HI         future income
                                                                Estimated                              Estimated          and SMI trust    (excluding interest)
                                                                                    Estimated
                                                              future income                          future income        fund account      less expenditures
                                                                                      future
                                                                (excluding                                less               assets        plus combined trust
                                                                                   expenditures
                                                                 interest)                            expenditures                             fund assets

Total Medicare (Note 24)
As of January 1, 2012                                         $         44,885     $      50,467     $      (5,581)        $        325     $            (5,256)
  Reasons for change
      Change in the valuation period                                     1,972              2,257             (285)                (46)                    (331)
      Change in projection base                                          (944)            (1,252)               308                   9                      317
      Changes in the demographic assumptions                             1,219                495               724                   -                      724
      Changes in economic and health care assumptions                    (342)              (374)                31                   -                       31
      Changes in law                                                       (11)               (42)               31                   -                       31
  Net changes                                                            1,893              1,084               809                (37)                      772
As of January 1, 2013                                         $         46,779     $      51,550     $      (4,772)        $       288      $            (4,484)
HI - Part A (Note 24)
As of January 1, 2012                                         $         15,598     $      21,179     $      (5,581)        $        244     $            (5,337)
  Reasons for change
      Change in the valuation period                                       631               916              (285)                (29)                    (314)
      Change in projection base                                          (258)             (566)                308                   5                      313
      Changes in the demographic assumptions                               764                 40               724                   -                      724
      Changes in economic and health care assumptions                    (544)             (576)                 31                   -                       31
      Changes in law                                                         -               (31)                31                   -                       31
  Net changes                                                              593             (216)                809                (24)                      786
As of January 1, 2013                                          $        16,192     $      20,963     $      (4,772)        $       220      $            (4,551)
SMI - Part B (Note 24)
As of January 1, 2012                                          $        20,159     $      20,159     $              -     $          80    $                 80
  Reasons for change
      Change in the valuation period                                       874               874                     -             (17)                     (17)
      Change in projection base                                          (504)             (504)                     -                3                        3
      Changes in the demographic assumptions                               212               212                     -                -                        -
      Changes in economic and health care assumptions                      647               647                     -                -                        -
      Changes in law                                                       (12)              (12)                    -                -                        -
  Net changes                                                            1,217             1,217                     -             (13)                     (13)
As of January 1, 2013                                          $        21,377     $      21,377     $              -      $         66     $                 66
SMI - Part D (Note 24)
As of January 1, 2012                                          $         9,128     $       9,128     $              -      $          1     $                 1
  Reasons for change
      Change in the valuation period                                       467               467                     -                -                       -
      Change in projection base                                          (182)             (182)                     -                -                       -
      Changes in the demographic assumptions                               242               242                     -                -                       -
      Changes in economic and health care assumptions                    (446)             (446)                     -                -                       -
      Changes in law                                                         1                 1                     -                -                       -
  Net changes                                                               83                83                     -                -                       -
As of January 1, 2013                                          $         9,211     $       9,211     $              -      $          1        $              1




Totals do not necessarily equal the sum of the rounded components.
The accompanying “Notes to the Principal Financial Statements” are an integral part of these statements.



 Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                 FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 79
                                                                                                                                         FINANCIAL SECTION



                                  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                           Statement of Changes in Social Insurance Amounts (unaudited)
                                      For the Two Year Period Ending September 30, 2013
                                     Medicare Hospital and Supplementary Medical Insurance
                                                           (in Billions)

                                                                   Actuarial present value over the next 75 years                          Actuarial present
                                                                               (open group measure)                                       value of estimated
                                                                                                                                            future income
                                                                Estimated                              Estimated         Combined HI     (excluding interest)
                                                                                    Estimated                            and SMI trust    less expenditures
                                                              future income                          future income
                                                                                      future                             fund account    plus combined trust
                                                                (excluding                                less
                                                                                   expenditures                             assets           fund assets
                                                                 interest)                            expenditures

 Total Medicare (Note 24)
 As of January 1, 2011                                         $        43,993     $      47,245     $      (3,252)       $        344     $          (2,908)
   Reasons for change
       Change in the valuation period                                     2,011             2,136             (125)               (28)                  (153)
       Change in projection base                                            113             (173)               286                  9                    295
       Changes in the demographic assumptions                           (1,189)           (1,092)              (97)                  -                   (97)
       Changes in economic and health care assumptions                        24            2,570           (2,546)                  -                (2,546)
       Changes in law                                                       (66)            (219)               153                  -                    153
   Net changes                                                              892             3,221           (2,329)               (19)                (2,348)
 As of January 1, 2012                                         $        44,885     $      50,467     $      (5,581)       $       325      $          (5,256)
 HI - Part A (Note 24)
 As of January 1, 2011                                         $        15,104     $      18,356     $      (3,252)       $        272     $          (2,980)
   Reasons for change
       Change in the valuation period                                      634               759              (125)               (34)                  (159)
       Change in projection base                                             15            (271)                286                  6                    292
       Changes in the demographic assumptions                              (84)               13               (97)                  -                   (97)
       Changes in economic and health care assumptions                     (71)            2,475            (2,546)                  -                (2,546)
       Changes in law                                                         -            (153)                153                  -                    153
   Net changes                                                             494             2,824            (2,329)               (28)                (2,357)
 As of January 1, 2012                                         $        15,598     $      21,179     $      (5,581)       $       244      $          (5,337)
 SMI - Part B (Note 24)
 As of January 1, 2011                                         $        18,940     $      18,940     $              -     $         71     $               71
   Reasons for change
       Change in the valuation period                                      845               845                    -                6                      6
       Change in projection base                                           152               152                    -                2                      2
       Changes in the demographic assumptions                            (339)             (339)                    -                -                      -
       Changes in economic and health care assumptions                     623               623                    -                -                      -
       Changes in law                                                      (61)              (61)                   -                -                      -
   Net changes                                                           1,220             1,220                    -                8                      8
 As of January 1, 2012                                         $        20,159     $      20,159     $              -     $         80     $               80
 SMI - Part D (Note 24)
 As of January 1, 2011                                         $         9,950     $       9,950     $              -     $          1     $                 1
   Reasons for change
       Change in the valuation period                                      533               533                    -                -                       -
       Change in projection base                                           (54)              (54)                   -                -                       -
       Changes in the demographic assumptions                            (767)             (767)                    -                -                       -
       Changes in economic and health care assumptions                   (528)             (528)                    -                -                       -
       Changes in law                                                       (5)               (5)                   -                -                       -
   Net changes                                                           (822)             (822)                    -                -                       -
 As of January 1, 2012                                         $         9,128     $       9,128      $             -     $          1     $                 1




Totals do not necessarily equal the sum of the rounded components.
The accompanying “Notes to the Principal Financial Statements” are an integral part of these statements.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 80
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION




                       NOTES TO THE PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                                    For the years ended September 30, 2013 and 2012

Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies

A. Reporting Entity
The accompanying financial statements include activities and operations of the United States Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS or the Department).

HHS is a Cabinet-level agency of the executive branch of the Federal Government. Its predecessor, the Department
of Health, Education and Welfare (HEW), was officially established on April 11, 1953. In 1979, the Department of
Education Organization Act was signed into law, creating a separate Department of Education. The HEW officially
became HHS on May 4, 1980. HHS is responsible for protecting the health of all Americans and providing essential
human services, especially for those who are least able to help themselves.

Organization and Structure of HHS
HHS is composed of the Office of the Secretary (OS) and eleven Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) with diverse missions
and programs. OS and the OPDIVs are each responsible for carrying out a mission, conducting a major line of
activity or producing one or a group of related products and/or services. Although organizationally located within
OS, the Program Support Center (PSC) reports on its activity separately because its business activities encompass
offering services to other Federal agencies and HHS OPDIVs. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
(ATSDR) is combined with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for financial reporting purposes.
Therefore, references to the CDC responsibility segment include ATSDR. Managers of the responsibility segments
report directly to the Department’s top management and the resources and results of operations can be clearly
distinguished from those of other responsibility segments. The 12 responsibility segments are:

 1.   Administration for Children and Families (ACF)
 2.   Administration for Community Living (ACL)
 3.   Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
 4.   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
      (ATSDR)
 5.   Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
 6.   Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
 7.   Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
 8.   Indian Health Service (IHS)
 9.   National Institutes of Health (NIH)
 10. Office of the Secretary (OS) – excluding the Program Support Center
 11. Program Support Center (PSC)
 12. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)

HHS partners with other governmental agencies to accomplish its mission. One such partnership is with the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) for the Biodefense Countermeasures Fund. It is reported on HHS financial
statements under the OS responsibility segment.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 81
                                                                                                     FINANCIAL SECTION



B. Basis of Accounting and Presentation
HHS financial statements have been prepared to report the financial position and results of operations of the
Department, pursuant to the requirements of 31 U.S. Code (U.S.C.) §3515(b), the Chief Financial Officer Act, as
amended by the Government Management Reform Act (GMRA), and presented in accordance with the
requirements in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-136, Financial Reporting Requirements
(OMB Circular A-136). These statements have been prepared from HHS’ financial records using an accrual basis in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (U.S.). The generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP) for federal entities are the standards prescribed by the Federal Accounting Standards
Advisory Board (FASAB) and recognized by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) as
federal GAAP. These statements are, therefore, different from financial reports prepared pursuant to other OMB
directives that are primarily used to monitor and control the use of budgetary resources.

Transactions are recorded on an accrual and budgetary basis of accounting. Under the accrual method of
accounting, revenues are recognized when earned and expenses are recognized when resources are consumed,
without regard to the payment of cash. Budgetary accounting principles are designed to recognize the obligation
of funds according to legal requirements, which, in many cases, is prior to the occurrence of an accrual-based
transaction. The recognition of budgetary accounting transactions is essential for compliance with legal constraints
and controls over the use of federal funds.

The financial statements consolidate the balances of approximately 250 appropriations and fund accounts. The
fund accounts include accounts used for suspense, collection of receipts and general government functions.
Transactions and balances within HHS have been eliminated in the presentation of the Consolidated Balance Sheet
and Statements of Net Cost and Changes in Net Position. The Combined Statements of Budgetary Resources are
presented on a combined basis. Therefore, transactions and balances within HHS have not been eliminated from
these statements. Supplemental information is accumulated from the OPDIVs’ reports, regulatory reports and
other sources within HHS. These statements should be read with the realization that they are for a component of
the U.S. Government, a sovereign entity. One implication of this is that liabilities cannot be liquidated without
legislation providing resources and budget authority for HHS.

C. Use of Estimates in Preparing Financial Statements
Financial statements prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. are based
on the selection of accounting policies and the application of significant accounting estimates. Some estimates
require management to make significant assumptions. Further, the estimates are based on current conditions that
may change in the future. Actual results could differ materially from the estimated amounts. The financial
statements include information to assist the reader in understanding the effect of changes in assumptions on the
related information.

D. Parent/Child Reporting
Allocation transfers are legal delegations by one agency of its authority to obligate budget authority and outlay
funds to another agency. HHS is party to allocation transfers with other federal entities as both a transferring
(parent) entity and a receiving (child) entity.

HHS received an exception to the Parent/Child reporting requirements of OMB Circular A‑136, as it pertains to the
allocation transfer from DHS to HHS for the Biodefense Countermeasures Fund for Fiscal Year (FY) 2008 and
beyond. Under this exception, HHS, as the child, assumed the financial statement reporting responsibilities of this
fund.




Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 82
                                                                                                     FINANCIAL SECTION



HHS allocates funds, as the parent, to the Department of Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs, and Treasury (Internal
Revenue Service). HHS receives allocation transfers, as the child, from the Departments of Agriculture, Justice and
State.

E. Reclassifications and Adjustments
Certain FY 2012 balances have been reclassified to conform to FY 2013 financial statement presentations. The
effects are immaterial. In accordance with OMB Circular A-136, the format of the Combined Statement of
Budgetary Resources changed in FY 2013; therefore, the FY 2012 balances have been presented in the FY 2013
format.

F. Funds from Dedicated Collections
On June 1, 2012 the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) issued Statement of Federal Financial
Accounting Standard (SFFAS) Number 43, Funds from Dedicated Collections: Amending Statement of Federal
Financial Accounting Standard 27, Identifying and Reporting Earmarked Funds. This Statement amended SFFAS
Number 27 by changing the term “earmarked funds” to “funds from dedicated collections” and clarifying certain
aspects of the requirements.

Funds from dedicated collections are financed by specifically identified revenues, often supplemented by other
financing sources which remain available over time. Dedicated collections must meet the following criteria:

       • A statute committing the Federal Government to use specifically identified revenues and/or other
         financing sources that are originally provided to the Federal Government from a non-federal source only
         for designated activities, benefits or purposes;

       • Explicit authority for the dedicated collections to retain revenues and/or other financing sources not used
         in the current period for future use to finance the designated activities, benefits or purposes; and

       • A requirement to account for and report on the receipt, use and retention of the revenues and other
         financing sources that distinguishes the dedicated collections from the Federal Government’s general
         revenues.

HHS’ major funds from dedicated collections are described in the sections below.

Medicare Hospital Insurance (HI) Trust Fund – Part A
Section 1817 of the Social Security Act established the Medicare HI Trust Fund. Medicare contractors are paid by
HHS to process Medicare claims for hospital in-patient services, hospice and certain skilled nursing and home
health services. Benefit payments made by the Medicare contractors for these services, as well as administrative
costs, are charged to the HI Trust Fund. A portion of HHS payments to Medicare Advantage Plans (previously
known as Managed Care Plans) is also charged to this fund. The financial statements include the HI Trust Fund
activities administered by the Treasury. The HI Trust Fund has permanent indefinite authority.

Employment tax revenue is the primary source of financing for the Medicare HI program. Medicare’s portion of
payroll and self-employment taxes is collected under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) (26 U.S.C. Ch
21) and Self Employment Contributions Act (SECA) of 1954 (Ch 2 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code, 26
U.S.C. §1401 through §1403). Employees and employers are both required to contribute 1.45 percent of earnings,
with no limitation, to the HI Trust Fund. Self-employed individuals contribute the full 2.9 percent of their self-
employment income. The Social Security Act requires the transfer of these contributions from the Treasury General
Fund to the HI Trust Fund based on the amount of wages certified by the Commissioner of Social Security from the
Social Security Administration (SSA) records of wages. The SSA uses the wage totals reported by employers via the




Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 83
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



quarterly Internal Revenue Service, Employer’s Quarterly Federal Tax Return, as the basis for conducting quarterly
certification of regular wages.

Medicare Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI) Trust Fund – Part B
Section 1841 of the Social Security Act established the Medicare SMI Trust Fund. Medicare contractors are paid by
HHS to process Medicare claims for physicians, medical suppliers, hospital outpatient services and rehabilitation,
end–stage renal disease treatment, rural health clinics, laboratory services and certain skilled nursing and home
health services. Benefit payments made by the Medicare contractors for these services, as well as administrative
costs, are charged to the SMI Trust Fund. A portion of HHS payments to Medicare Advantage Plans is also charged
to this fund. The financial statements include SMI Trust Fund activities administered by the Treasury. The SMI Trust
Fund has permanent indefinite authority.

SMI benefits and administrative expenses are generally financed by monthly premiums paid by Medicare
beneficiaries and are matched by the Federal Government through the General Fund appropriation, Payments to
the Health Care Trust Funds. Section 1844 of the Social Security Act authorizes appropriated funds to match SMI
premiums collected and prescribes the ratio for the match as well as the method to fully compensate the Trust
Fund if insufficient funds are available in the appropriation to match all premiums received in the fiscal year.

Medicare SMI Trust Fund – Part D
The Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act (Medicare Modernization Act, or MMA)
established the Medicare Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund – Part D, Prescription Drug Benefit. The
Prescription Drug Benefit makes a prescription drug benefit available to all Medicare beneficiaries who opt into the
program. Beneficiaries eligible for Medicaid are automatically enrolled unless they have other credible drug
coverage. HHS reports the Prescription Drug Benefit within the financial statements as part of the SMI Trust Fund,
in the Medicare column. Drug plans are offered by insurance companies and other private companies approved by
Medicare and are of two types: Medicare Prescription Drug Plans, which add coverage to FFS Medicare; and
Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug Plans and other Medicare Health Plans in which drug coverage is offered as
part of a benefit package that includes Part A and Part B services. Medicare helps employers and unions continue
to provide retiree drug coverage that meets Medicare’s standards through the Retiree Drug Subsidy. The Low
Income Subsidy helps those with limited income and resources.

Medicare Integrity Program
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) established the Medicare Integrity
Program and codified the Medicare Integrity Program activities previously known as “payment safeguards.” The
HIPAA also established the Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control Account, which includes a dedicated
appropriation for carrying out the Medicare Integrity Program. Through the Medicare Integrity Program, HHS
contracts with eligible entities to perform such activities as medical and utilization reviews, fraud reviews and cost
report audits. In addition, the Department educates providers and beneficiaries, with respect to payment integrity
and benefit quality assurance issues. The Medicare Integrity Program is funded by the HI Trust Fund.

G. Revenue and Financing Sources
HHS receives the majority of funding needed to support its discretionary programs through Congressional
appropriation and user fees. The U.S. Constitution prescribes that no money may be expended by an agency unless
the funds have been made available by Congressional appropriation. Appropriations are recognized as financing
sources when related expenses are incurred or assets are purchased. Revenues from reimbursable agreements are
recognized when the goods or services are provided by HHS. Other financing sources, such as donations and
transfers of assets without reimbursements, are also recognized on the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net
Position.



Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 84
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION




Appropriations
HHS receives annual, multi-year and no-year appropriations that may be used within statutory limits. For example,
funds for general operations are normally made available for one fiscal year, funds for long-term projects such as
major construction will be available for the expected life of the project and funds used to establish revolving fund
operations are generally available indefinitely (i.e., no-year funds).

Permanent Indefinite Appropriations
HHS permanent indefinite appropriations are open-ended and the dollar amount is unknown at the time the
authority is granted. These appropriations are available for specific purposes without current year action by
Congress.

Borrowing Authority
HHS uses indefinite borrowing authority under the Federal Credit Reform Act, as amended, for its loan programs.
Borrowing authority increases budgetary resources and enables costs to be financed by borrowing from Treasury.
Any unobligated borrowing authority does not carry forward to the next fiscal year. HHS has three programs with
borrowing authority: the CMS Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan (CO-OP) Loan Program, the Health Center
Loan Program and the Health Education Assistance Loan Program.

  • Direct Loans. Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the CO-OP Loan Program was
    established to provide loans for start-up costs and repayable grants to assist the applicant in meeting State
    solvency requirements. This provision fosters the creation of qualified, non-profit health insurance issuers
    who will offer qualified health plans in the individual and small-group markets of each State. These loans will
    be repaid in a manner consistent with federal requirements and terms and conditions of the loan agreement.
    In FY 2012, HHS awarded the first loan agreements for both start-up and solvency requirements.
    Disbursements have been made for both types of loans.
  • Loan Guarantees. HHS administers guaranteed loan programs for the Health Center and the Health
    Education Assistance Loan Programs. Loans receivable represent defaulted guaranteed loans which have
    been paid to lenders under these programs and also include interest due to HHS on the defaulted loans. The
    liabilities for loan guarantees are valued at the present value of the cash outflows from HHS less the present
    value of related inflows.

HHS reports loans and loan guarantees in accordance with the Federal Credit Reform Act. Due to the immateriality
of these Direct Loans and Loan Guarantees, the related receivables and liabilities are reported in Other Assets and
Other Liabilities, respectively. Budgetary related activity is reported separately within the Combined Statement of
Budgetary Resources.

Exchange Revenue
Exchange revenue results when HHS provides goods or services to another entity for a price and is recognized
when earned (i.e., when goods have been delivered or services have been rendered). These revenues reduce the
cost of operations.

HHS pricing policy for reimbursable agreements is to recover full cost and should result in no profit or loss for HHS.
In addition to revenues related to reimbursable agreements, HHS collects various user fees to offset the cost of its
programs. Certain fees charged by HHS are based on an amount set by law or regulation and may not represent
full cost.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 85
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



With minor exceptions, all revenue receipts by federal agencies are processed through the Treasury central
accounting system. Regardless of whether they are derived from exchange or non-exchange transactions, all
receipts not earmarked by Congressional appropriation for immediate HHS use are deposited in the General or
Special Funds of the Treasury. Amounts not retained for use by HHS are reported as Transfers-in/out Without
Reimbursement to other government agencies on HHS Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net Position.

Non-Exchange Revenue
Non-exchange revenue results from donations to the government and from the government’s sovereign right to
demand payment, including taxes. Non-exchange revenues are recognized when a specifically identifiable, legally-
enforceable claim to resources arises, but only to the extent that collection is probable and the amount is
reasonably estimable.

Non-exchange revenue is not considered to reduce the cost of the Department’s operations and is separately
reported on the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net Position. Employment tax revenue collected under FICA
and SECA is considered non-exchange revenue.

Imputed Financing Sources
In certain instances, HHS’ operating costs are paid out of funds appropriated to other federal entities. For example,
by law, certain costs of retirement programs are paid by the Office of Personnel Management and certain legal
judgments against HHS are paid from the Judgment Fund maintained by the Treasury. When costs are identifiable
to HHS and directly attributable to HHS’ operations and are paid by other agencies, HHS recognizes these amounts
as imputed costs within the Consolidated Statement of Net Cost and as an imputed financing source on the
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net Position.

H. Intragovernmental Transactions and Relationships
Intragovernmental transactions are business activities conducted between two different federal entities.
Transactions with the public are transactions in which either the buyer or seller of the goods or services is a non-
federal entity.

If a federal entity purchases goods or services from another federal entity and sells them to the public, the
exchange revenue is classified as with the public, but the related costs would be classified as intragovernmental.
The purpose of the classifications is to enable the Federal Government to provide consolidated financial
statements and not to match public and intragovernmental revenue with costs incurred to produce public and
intragovernmental revenue.

In the course of operations, HHS has relationships and financial transactions with numerous federal agencies
including the SSA and the Treasury. The SSA determines eligibility for Medicare programs and also deducts
Medicare Part-B premiums from Social Security benefit payments for Social Security beneficiaries who elect to
enroll in the Medicare Part-B program and elect to deduct their premiums from their benefit checks. SSA then
transfers those funds to the Medicare Part-B Trust Fund. The Treasury receives the cumulative excess of Medicare
receipts and other financing over outlays and issues interest-bearing securities in exchange for the use of those
monies. Medicare Part-D is primarily financed by the General Fund of the Treasury, as well as beneficiary
premiums and payments from States.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 86
                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION



I. Entity and Non-Entity Assets
Entity assets are assets the reporting entity has authority to use in its operations (i.e., management has the
authority to decide how the funds are used), or management is legally obligated to use the funds to meet the
entity obligations.

Non-entity assets are assets held by the reporting entity, but not available for use. HHS non-entity assets are
composed of delinquent child support payments for the Child Support Enforcement Program, which are withheld
from federal tax refunds and interest accrued on over-payments and cost settlements reported by the Medicare
contractors.

J. Fund Balance with Treasury (FBWT)
HHS maintains its available funds with the Treasury. The FBWT is available to pay current liabilities and finance
authorized purchases. Cash receipts and disbursements are processed by the Treasury and HHS FBWT accounts are
reconciled with those of Treasury on a regular basis.

K. Custodial Activity
In accordance with guidance set forth in OMB Circular A-136, HHS reports custodial activities on its Consolidated
Balance Sheet. However, HHS does not prepare a separate Statement of Custodial Activity since custodial activities
are incidental to its operations and the amounts collected are immaterial.

ACF receives funding from the Internal Revenue Service for outlay to the States for child support. This funding
represents delinquent child support payments withheld from federal tax refunds. The FDA custodial activity
involves collections of Civil Monetary Penalties (CMP) assessed by the Department of Justice on behalf of the FDA.
The FDA is charged with assessing penalties for violations in areas such as illegally manufactured, marketed and
distributed animal food and drug products. The CDC custodial activity consists of the collection of interest on
outstanding receivables and funds received from debts in collection status.

L. Investments, Net
HHS invests entity Medicare Trust Fund balances in excess of current needs in U.S. securities. The Treasury acts as
the fiscal agent for the U.S. Government’s investments in securities. Sections 1817 and 1841 of the Social Security
Act require that Trust Funds not necessary to meet current expenditures be invested in interest-bearing
obligations or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the U.S. Government. The cash
receipts, collected from the public as dedicated collections, are deposited with the Treasury, which uses the cash
for general governmental purposes. Treasury securities are issued by the Bureau of Public Debt to the HI and SMI
Trust Funds as evidence of their receipt and are reported as an asset for the Trust Funds and a corresponding
liability of the Treasury. The Federal Government does not set aside assets to pay future benefits or other
expenditures associated with the HI or SMI Trust Funds.
The Treasury securities provide the HI and SMI Trust Funds with authority to draw upon the U.S. Treasury to make
future benefit payments or other expenditures. When the Trust Funds require redemption of these securities to
make expenditures, the government finances the expenditures by raising taxes, raising other receipts, borrowing
from the public or repaying less debt, or curtailing other expenditures. This is the same way that the government
finances all expenditures.

The Treasury securities issued and redeemed to the HI and SMI Trust Funds are Non-Marketable (Par Value)
securities. These investments are carried at face value as determined by Treasury. Interest income is compounded
semi-annually (June and December) by Treasury and at fiscal year-end is adjusted to include an accrual for interest
earned from July 1 to September 30 (See Note 4).




Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 87
                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION



The Vaccine Injury Compensation Trust Fund, a dedicated collections fund similar to the HI and SMI Trust Funds,
invests in Non-Marketable, Market-Based securities issued by the Bureau of Public Debt in the form of One Day
Certificates and Market-Based Bills, Notes and Bonds.

The NIH Gift Funds are invested in Non-Marketable, Market-Based Bills issued by the Bureau of Public Debt. Funds
are invested for either a 90 or 180-day period based on the need for funds. No provision is made for unrealized
gains or losses on these securities since it is HHS’ intent to hold investments to maturity.

The Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act (CHIPRA) established a Child Enrollment Contingency
Fund to provide additional funding to States that experience shortfalls in their Children’s Health Insurance
Programs (CHIP). The Affordable Care Act extended the availability of the fund through 2015. This fund is invested
in Non-Marketable, Market-Based Bills issued by the Bureau of Public Debt. These investments will be redeemed
as funds are needed by the States to cover short-term shortfalls in the program.

M. Accounts Receivable, Net
Accounts Receivable, Net consists of the amounts owed to HHS by other federal agencies and the public for the
provision of goods and services, less an allowance for uncollectible amounts on public receivables.
Intragovernmental accounts receivable consists of the amounts owed to HHS by other federal agencies for
reimbursable work. No allowance for uncollectible amounts is established for intragovernmental accounts
receivable because they are considered fully collectible. Accounts Receivable, Net from the public is primarily
composed of provider and beneficiary over-payments, Medicare Prescription Drug over-payments, Medicare
premiums, CMPs & Other Restitutions, State phased-down contributions, audit disallowances, and the recognition
of Medicare Secondary Payer (MSP) accounts receivable.

Accounts Receivable, Net from the public is presented net of an allowance for uncollectible amounts. The
allowance is based on past collection experience and an analysis of outstanding balances. For Medicare accounts
receivable, HHS calculates the allowance for uncollectible amounts based on the collection activity and the age of
the debt for the most current fiscal year, while taking into consideration the average uncollectible percentage for
the preceding five years. The Medicaid accounts receivable have been recorded at a net realizable amount based
on historical analyses of actual recoveries and the rate of disallowances found in favor of the States.

N. Advances and Accrued Grant Liability
HHS awards grants to various grantees and provides advance payments to meet grantees’ cash needs to carry out
HHS programs. Advance payments are liquidated upon grantees reporting expenditures on the quarterly Federal
Financial Report. In some instances, grantees incur expenditures before drawing down funds that, when claimed,
would reduce the Advances account to a negative balance. An Accrued Grant Liability occurs when the accrued
grant expenses exceed the outstanding advances to grantees.

HHS grants are classified into two categories: “Grants Not Subject to Grant Expense Accrual” and “Grants Subject
to Grant Expense Accrual.” “Grants Not Subject to Grant Expense Accrual” represents formula grants (also referred
to as “block grants”) under which grantees provide a variety of services or payments to individuals and local
agencies. Expenses are recorded on the cash-basis of accounting, as the grantees draw funds. These grants are
funded based on allocations determined by budgets and agreements approved by the sponsoring OPDIV.
Therefore, they are not subject to grant expense accrual.

For “Grants Subject to Grant Expense Accrual,” commonly referred to as “non-block grants,” grantees draw funds
based on their estimated cash needs. As grantees report their actual disbursements quarterly, the amounts are
recorded as expenses and their advance balances are reduced. At year-end, the OPDIVs report both actual
payments made through the fourth quarter and an unreported grant expenditure estimate for the fourth quarter


Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 88
                                                                                                         FINANCIAL SECTION



based on historical spending patterns of the grantees. The year-end accrual estimate equals the estimated fourth
quarter disbursements plus an average of two weeks annual expenditures for expenses incurred prior to the cash
draw. For the Foster Care Program, the year-end accrual estimate equals the estimated fourth quarter
disbursements, plus one-week average of foster care annual expenditures for expenses incurred prior to the cash
draw.

Exceptions to the definition of “block” or “non-block” grants for reporting purposes are the Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families Program and the Child Care Development Fund Program. These two programs are referred to
as “block” grants but, since the programs report expenses to HHS, they are treated as “non-block” grants for the
estimate of the grant accrual.

O. Inventory and Related Property, Net
Inventory and Related Property, Net primarily consists of Inventory Held for Sale, Operating Materials and Supplies
and Stockpile Materials.

Inventory Held for Sale consists of small equipment and supplies held by the Service and Supply Funds (SSFs) for
sale to HHS components and other federal entities. Inventories Held for Sale are valued at historical cost using the
weighted average valuation method for the PSC SSF’s inventories and using the moving average valuation method
for the NIH SSF’s inventories.

Operating Materials and Supplies include pharmaceuticals, biological products and other medical supplies used to
provide medical services and conduct medical research. They are recorded as assets when purchased and are
expensed when consumed. Operating Materials and Supplies are valued at historical cost using the first-in/first-out
(FIFO) cost flow assumption.
Stockpile Materials are held in reserve to respond to local and national emergencies. HHS maintains several
stockpiles for emergency response purposes, which include the Strategic National Stockpile (SNS), Vaccines for
Children (VFC) and Avian Influenza (H5N1). The H5N1 vaccine stockpile is held in reserve to respond to an avian
pandemic declaration. The stockpile contains several million doses of vaccine in bulk which are stored and
maintained for possible use.

Project BioShield has increased the preparedness of the nation by procuring medical countermeasures that include
anthrax vaccine, anthrax antitoxins, botulin antitoxins and blocking and decorporation agents for a radiological
event. All stockpiles are valued at historical cost, using various cost flow assumptions, including the FIFO for SNS
and specific identification for VFC and H5N1.

P. General Property, Plant and Equipment, Net
The General Property, Plant and Equipment, Net consists of buildings, structures and facilities used for general
operations, land acquired for general operating purposes, equipment; assets under capital lease, leasehold
improvements, construction-in-progress; and internal use software. The basis for recording purchased Property,
Plant and Equipment is full cost, including all costs incurred to bring the Property, Plant and Equipment to a form
and location suitable for its intended use and is presented net of accumulated depreciation.

The cost of Property, Plant and Equipment acquired under a capital lease is the amount recognized as a liability for
the capital lease at its inception. When property is acquired through a donation, the cost recognized is the
estimated fair market value on the date of acquisition. The cost of Property, Plant and Equipment transferred from
other federal entities is the transferring entity’s net book value. Except for internal use software, HHS capitalizes all
Property, Plant and Equipment with an initial acquisition cost of $25,000 or more and an estimated useful life of
two years or more.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 89
                                                                                                        FINANCIAL SECTION



Property, Plant and Equipment is depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the
asset. Land and land rights, including permanent improvements, are not depreciated. Normal maintenance and
repair costs are expensed as incurred.

In accordance with SFFAS Number 10, Accounting for Internal Use Software, capitalization of internally developed,
contractor-developed/commercial off-the-shelf software begins in the software development phase. HHS’
capitalization threshold for internal use software costs for appropriated fund accounts is $1 million and the
threshold for revolving fund accounts is $500 thousand. Costs below the threshold levels are expensed. Software is
amortized using the straight line method over a period of seven to ten years consistent with the estimated life
used for planning and acquisition purposes. Capitalized costs include all direct and indirect costs.

Q. Stewardship Property, Plant and Equipment
Stewardship Property, Plant and Equipment consists of stewardship land whose physical properties resemble
those of General Property, Plant and Equipment that are traditionally capitalized in the financial statements. In
accordance with SFFAS Number 8, Supplementary Stewardship Reporting, HHS does not report a related amount
on the balance sheet.

HHS’ stewardship assets support the IHS day-to-day operations of providing health care to American Indians and
Alaskan Natives in remote areas of the country where no other facilities exist.

Indian Trust lands do not meet the definition of Stewardship land (i.e., land other than that acquired for or used in
connection with capitalized General Property, Plant and Equipment), but have always been held by the U.S.
Government as separate and distinct because of its long-term trust responsibility. IHS has built health care facilities
on these Trust lands. Trust lands, when no longer needed by the IHS in connection with its general use Property,
Plant and Equipment, must be returned to the Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs for continuing
trust responsibilities and oversight.

HHS asset accountability reports differentiate Indian Trust land parcels from General Property, Plant and
Equipment situated thereon. The Required Supplementary Information section provides additional information for
Stewardship Property, Plant and Equipment.

R. Liabilities
Liabilities are recognized for amounts of probable and measurable future outflows or other sacrifices of resources
as a result of past transactions or events. Since HHS is a component of the U.S. Government, a sovereign entity, its
liabilities cannot be liquidated without legislation that provides resources to do so. Payments of all liabilities other
than contracts can be abrogated by the sovereign entity. In accordance with public law and existing federal
accounting standards, no liability is recognized for future payments to be made on behalf of current workers
contributing to the Medicare HI Trust Fund, since liabilities are only those items that are present obligations of the
government. HHS’ liabilities are classified as covered by budgetary resources or not covered by budgetary
resources.

Liabilities Covered by Budgetary Resources
Available budgetary resources include new budget authority, spending authority from offsetting collections,
recoveries of expired budget authority, unobligated balances of budgetary resources at the beginning of the year,
permanent indefinite appropriation and borrowing authority.

Liabilities Not Covered by Budgetary Resources
Sometimes funding has not yet been made available through Congressional appropriation or current earnings. The
major liabilities in this category include contingencies, employee annual leave earned, but not taken, and amounts
billed by the Department of Labor (DOL) for the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) of 1916 (5 U.S.C.


Department of Health and Human Services                                                 FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 90
                                                                                                         FINANCIAL SECTION



751) disability payments. The actuarial FECA liability determined by the DOL but not yet billed is also included in
this category.

S. Accounts Payable
Accounts Payable primarily consists of amounts due for goods and services received, progress in contract
performance, interest due on accounts payable and other miscellaneous payables.

T. Fiduciary Activities
Effective FY 2009, the SFFAS Number 31, Accounting for Fiduciary Activities, requires federal entities to distinguish
the information relating to fiduciary activities of the federal entity from all other activities. The fiduciary activities
are Federal Government activities that relate to the collection or receipt and the subsequent management,
protection, accounting, investment and disposition of cash or other assets in which non-federal individuals or
entities have an ownership interest that the Federal Government must uphold. HHS does not have reportable
activities as defined by SFFAS Number 31.

U. Accrued Payroll and Benefits
Accrued Payroll and Benefits consists of salaries, wages, leave and benefits earned by employees but not disbursed
at the end of the reporting period. A liability for annual and other vested compensatory leave is accrued as earned
and reduced when taken. At the end of each fiscal year, the balance in the accrued annual leave liability account is
adjusted to reflect current pay rates. Annual leave earned but not taken is considered an unfunded liability since it
will be funded from future appropriations when it is actually taken by employees. Sick leave and other types of
leave are not accrued and are expensed when taken. Intragovernmental Accrued Payroll and Benefits consists
primarily of HHS FECA liability.

V. Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable
Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable represents a liability for Medicare and Medicaid owed to the public for
medical services Incurred But Not Reported (IBNR) as of the end of the reporting period. The Medicare and
Medicaid programs are the largest entitlement programs in HHS.

Medicare
The Medicare liability is developed by the CMS Office of the Actuary and includes:

  • An estimate of claims incurred that may or may not have been submitted to the Medicare contractors, but
    not yet approved for payment;
  • Actual claims approved for payment by the Medicare contractors for which checks have not yet been issued;
  • Checks issued by the Medicare contractors in payment of claims that have not yet been cashed by payees;
  • Periodic interim payments for services rendered in the current fiscal year but paid in the subsequent fiscal
    year;
  • An estimate of retroactive settlements of cost reports submitted to the Medicare contractors by health care
    providers.

HHS develops estimates for medical costs IBNR using an actuarial process that is consistently applied, centrally
controlled and automated. The actuarial models consider factors such as time from date of service to claim receipt,
claim backlogs, medical care professional contract rate changes, medical care consumption and other medical cost
trends. HHS estimates liabilities for physician, hospital and other medical cost disputes based upon an analysis of
potential outcomes, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 91
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION




Each period, HHS re-examines previously established medical cost payable estimates based on actual claim
submissions and other changes in facts and circumstances. As the liability estimates recorded in prior periods
become more exact, HHS adjusts the amount of the estimates and includes the changes in estimates in medical
costs in the period in which the change is identified. In every reporting period, HHS operating results include the
effects of more completely developed Medicare benefits payable estimates associated with previously reported
periods.

Medicaid
The Medicaid estimate represents the net federal share of expenses incurred by the States but not yet reported to
HHS. This estimate is developed based on historical relationships between prior Medicaid net payables and current
Medicaid activity.

W. Federal Employee and Veterans’ Benefits
HHS administers the Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps Retirement System (authorized by the Public
Health Service Act), a defined non-contributory benefit plan, for its active duty officers, retiree annuitants and
survivors. The plan does not have accumulated assets and funding is provided entirely on a pay-as-you-go basis by
Congressional appropriation. HHS records the present value of the Commissioned Corps pension and post-
retirement health benefits.
The liability for federal employee and veterans’ benefits also includes a liability for actual and estimated future
payments for workers’ compensation pursuant to the FECA. The FECA provides income and medical cost
protection to federal employees injured on the job or who sustained a work-related occupational disease. It also
covers beneficiaries of employees whose deaths are attributable to job-related injury or occupational disease. The
FECA program is administered by the DOL which pays valid claims and subsequently bills the employing federal
agency. The FECA liability consists of two components: (1) actual claims billed by the DOL to agencies but not yet
paid; and (2) an estimated liability for future benefit payments as a result of past events such as death, disability
and medical costs.

Most HHS employees participate in the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS), a defined benefit plan, or the
Federal Employees’ Retirement System (FERS), a defined benefit and contribution plan. For employees covered
under CSRS, the Department contributes a fixed percentage of pay. Most employees hired after December 31,
1983, are automatically covered by the FERS. For employees covered under FERS, HHS contributes the employer’s
matching share for Social Security and Medicare Insurance. FERS offers a Thrift Savings Plan into which HHS
automatically contributes one percent of employee pay and matches the first three percent of employee
contributions dollar for dollar. Each dollar of the employee’s next two percent of basic pay is matched at 50 cents
on the dollar.

The Office of Personnel Management is the administering agency for both of these benefit plans and, thus, reports
CSRS and FERS assets, accumulated plan benefits and unfunded liabilities applicable to federal employees.
Therefore, HHS does not recognize any liability on its Consolidated Balance Sheet for pensions, other retirement
benefits and other post-employment benefits of its federal employees with the exception of the PHS
Commissioned Corps. HHS does, however, recognize an expense in the Consolidated Statement of Net Cost and an
imputed financing source for the annualized unfunded portion of pension and post-retirement benefits in the
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net Position. Gains or losses from changes in assumptions in the PHS
Commissioned Corps retirement benefits are recognized at year-end.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 92
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



X. Contingencies
A loss contingency is an existing condition, situation or set of circumstances involving uncertainty as to possible
loss to HHS. The uncertainty ultimately should be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur.
The likelihood that the future event or events will confirm the loss or the incurrence of a liability can range from
probable to remote. SFFAS Number 5, Accounting for Liabilities of the Federal Government, as amended by SFFAS
Number 12, Recognition of Contingent Liabilities from Litigation, contains the criteria for recognition and
disclosure of contingent liabilities.

HHS and its components could be parties to various administrative proceedings, legal actions and claims brought
by or against it. With the exception of pending, threatened or potential litigation, a contingent liability is
recognized when a past transaction or event has occurred, a future outflow or other sacrifice of resources is more
likely than not to occur and the related future outflow or sacrifice of resources is measurable. For pending,
threatened or potential litigation, a contingent liability is recognized when a past transaction or event has
occurred, a future outflow or other sacrifice of resources is likely to occur and the related future outflow or
sacrifice of resources is measurable.

Y. Statement of Social Insurance
The Statement of Social Insurance (SOSI) presents the projected 75-year actuarial present values of the income
and expenditures of the HI and SMI Trust Funds. Future expenditures are expected to arise from the health care
payment provisions specified in current law for current and future program participants and from associated
administrative expenses. Actuarial present values are computed on the basis of the intermediate set of
assumptions specified in the Annual Report of the Medicare Board of Trustees. These assumptions represent the
Trustees’ best estimate of likely future economic, demographic and health care-specific conditions. The projected
potential future income and expenditures under current law are not included in the accompanying Consolidated
Balance Sheet, Statements of Net Cost and Changes in Net Position or Combined Statement of Budgetary
Resources.

In order to make projections regarding the future financial status of the HI and SMI Trust Funds, various
assumptions have to be made. As stated previously, the estimates presented here are based on the assumption
that the Trust Funds will continue to operate under the law in effect May 31, 2013. In addition, the estimates
depend on many economic, demographic and health care-specific assumptions. These include changes in per
beneficiary health care cost, wages, the gross domestic product (GDP), the consumer price index (CPI), fertility
rates, mortality rates, immigration rates and interest rates. In most cases, these assumptions vary from year to
year during the first 5 to 30 years before reaching their ultimate values for the remainder of the 75-year projection
period. The assumed growth rates for per beneficiary health care costs vary throughout the projection period.

The assumptions underlying the SOSI actuarial projections are drawn from the Social Security and Medicare
Trustees Reports for 2013. Specific assumptions are made for each of the different types of service provided by the
Medicare program (for example, hospital care and physician services). These assumptions include changes in the
payment rates, utilization and intensity of each type of service.

Z. Affordable Care Act
In FY 2010, President Barack Obama signed health insurance reform legislation giving Americans more control over
their health care. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation
Act collectively referred to as the Affordable Care Act ensures that all Americans have access to quality, affordable
health care, while helping to reduce health care costs. Further information is available at
http://www.healthcare.gov.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 93
                                                                                                     FINANCIAL SECTION



Under the Affordable Care Act, HHS was authorized to execute several new programs, which include the Pre-
existing Condition Insurance Plan Program, Early Retiree Reinsurance Program, Health Insurance Marketplaces and
the CO-OP Program. A brief description of these programs and their impact on the financial statements is
presented below.

Pre-existing Condition Insurance Plan Program
This program offers coverage to uninsured Americans who have been unable to obtain health coverage because of
a pre-existing health condition. This program is administered directly by States or by the Federal Government in
those states that do not operate their own programs. Congress appropriated $5 billion for the life of this interim
program, which enables coverage until the Marketplaces become operational in 2014.

The Affordable Care Act provides the HHS Secretary significant authorities to ensure the financial sustainability of
this program, including, under Section 1101 Paragraph (g) (2), the authority to eliminate deficits under the
program if available funds are less than estimated expenses. The Secretary also has the authority under Paragraph
(g) (4) to stop taking applications to comply with funding limitations, and in February 2013, CMS announced it
would stop accepting applications in both the Federally-run and State-run programs.

Early Retiree Reinsurance Program
Pursuant to the Affordable Care Act, HHS established a temporary reinsurance program to reimburse a portion of
the employer cost of providing health insurance coverage for early retirees. The Affordable Care Act imposes
limitations on the amounts of such reimbursements per claim. Congress appropriated $5 billion for the life of this
program. The Affordable Care Act authorizes the HHS Secretary to stop taking applications for participation in the
program based on the availability of funding. On June 29, 2010, HHS began accepting applications from employers.
The program permits approved applicants to submit for reimbursement expenses incurred after June 1, 2010.
Based on the large number of approved applications and the rate of reimbursement, and in anticipation of the
complete distribution of Early Retiree Reinsurance Program (ERRP) funds, the program ceased accepting
applications for participation in the program on May 6, 2011. The program will end in 2014, and CMS issued a
Federal Register notice on March 21, 2012, indicating that plan sponsors are expected to use ERRP funds by
December 31, 2014.

Health Insurance Marketplaces
Grants have been provided to the States to establish Affordable Insurance Exchanges, better known as Health
Insurance Marketplaces. As of September 30, 2013, HHS has awarded about $4.1 billion to date in cumulative
Marketplace grants to states, including Establishment grants to 37 states and D.C.

Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan Program
The CO-OP Program fosters qualified non-profit health insurance issuers created to offer qualified health plans to
the individual and small group markets. Under this program, HHS provides assistance to organizations applying to
become qualified non-profit health insurance issuers through loans to assist in meeting start-up costs and to assist
the applicant meet State solvency requirements. In accordance with regulations as well as legislative requirements,
start-up loans shall be repaid within five years and the solvency loans within 15 years after disbursement,
considering State reserve requirements and solvency regulations. Congress appropriated $6 billion to carry out this
program under the Affordable Care Act. In the last two years, Congress has rescinded $4.9 billion from the original
appropriations. The FY 2011 April Continuing Resolution rescinded $2.2 billion, the FY 2012 December Omnibus
Appropriation rescinded an additional $0.4 billion, and the American Taxpayer Relief Act rescinded $2.3 billion. CO-
OP Program loans have been awarded in 24 states.




Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 94
                                                                                                       FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 2. Entity and Non-Entity Assets (in Millions)

                                                                                             2013                  2012
 Non-Entity Intragovernmental Assets
     Fund Balance with Treasury                                                        $          -          $          1
     Accounts Receivable                                                                        11                      6
 Total Non-Entity Intragovernmental Assets                                                      11                      7
 Accounts Receivable With the Public                                                            30                    22
 Total Non-Entity Assets                                                                        41                    29
 Total Entity Assets                                                                        470,214              530,624
 Total Assets                                                                          $    470,255          $   530,653




Note 3. Fund Balance with Treasury (in Millions)

 Fund Balance with Treasury                                                                   2013                 2012
      Trust Funds                                                                       $     9,916          $    23,544
      Revolving Funds                                                                         1,263                1,205
      Appropriated Funds                                                                    147,965              171,893
      Other Funds                                                                                48                  706
                Total                                                                   $   159,192          $   197,348



 Status of Fund Balance with Treasury
      Unobligated Balance
          Available                                                                     $    32,092          $    75,237
          Unavailable                                                                         9,596                8,718
      Obligated Balance not yet Disbursed                                                   178,348              170,666
      Non-Budgetary Fund Balance with Treasury                                              (60,844)             (57,273)
                Total                                                                   $   159,192          $   197,348




Other Funds include balances in deposit, suspense and related non-spending accounts. The Unobligated Balance
includes funds that are restricted for future use and not apportioned for current use of $13.0 billion and $16.3
billion as of September 30, 2013 and September 30, 2012, respectively. The restricted amount is primarily for the
Affordable Care Act programs, Children’s Health Insurance Program, CMS Program Management, State Grants and
Demonstrations and the Recovery Act Health Information Technology Program. In FY 2013, $21.5 billion was
apportioned under the Affordable Care Act, of which $9.6 billion is restricted for future use.

The Non-Budgetary FBWT negative balances reported for September 30, 2013 and 2012 are primarily due to CMS
Medicare Trust Funds temporarily precluded from obligation.




Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 95
                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 4. Investments, Net (in Millions)


                                                                                                            Market
                                                              Amortized     Interest     Investments,       Value
 2013                                              Cost       (Premium)    Receivable        Net          Disclosure
 Intragovernmental Securities
    Non-Marketable: Par Value                     $ 273,395   $        -    $    2,778    $     276,173    $   276,173
    Non-Marketable: Market-Based                      5,711        (191)           30             5,550          5,550
 Total, Intragovernmental                         $ 279,106    $   (191)    $    2,808    $     281,723    $   281,723



                                                                                                            Market
                                                              Amortized     Interest     Investments,       Value
 2012                                              Cost       (Premium)    Receivable        Net          Disclosure
 Intragovernmental Securities
    Non-Marketable: Par Value                     $ 297,616   $        -    $    3,193    $     300,809    $   300,809
    Non-Marketable: Market-Based                      5,692        (156)           36             5,572          5,572
 Total, Intragovernmental                         $ 303,308   $    (156)    $    3,229    $     306,381    $   306,381



HHS investments consist primarily of Medicare Trust Fund (funds from dedicated collections) investments.
Medicare Non-Marketable: Par Value Bonds are carried at face value and have maturity dates ranging from June
30, 2014 through June 30, 2026, with interest rates ranging from 1.75 percent to 6.5 percent. Medicare Non-
Marketable: Par Value Certificates of Indebtedness mature on June 30, 2014, with an interest rate of 2.375
percent.

Securities held by the Vaccine Injury Compensation Trust Fund (funds from dedicated collections) will mature
through fiscal year 2019. The Market-Based Notes paid from 1.0 percent to 4.125 percent during October 1, 2012
to September 30, 2013 and 1.875 percent to 4.125 percent during October 1, 2011 to September 30, 2012. The
Market-Based Bonds pay 9.125 percent through FY 2018.

The Market Based Bills held in the NIH gift funds during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2013, yielded from
0.04 percent to 0.15 percent depending on the date purchased and the time to maturity.

The investments held by the CHIP Child Enrollment Contingency Fund in the amount of $2.1 billion as of
September 30, 2013, are short term Non-Marketable Market-Based Bills purchased at a discount which are fully
amortized at the maturity date.




Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 96
                                                                                                              FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 5. Accounts Receivable, Net (in Millions)


                                                                     Penalties,
                                                                      Fines, &
                                          Accounts                     Admin       Accounts
                                          Receivable     Interest       Fees      Receivable,                       Net HHS
2013                                       Principal    Receivable   Receivable     Gross        Allowance         Receivables
Intragovernmental
Entity                                     $    3,638     $      -     $      -    $     3,638   $             -    $     3,638
Non-Entity                                         11            -            -             11                 -             11
Total, Intragovernmental                   $    3,649     $      -     $      -    $     3,649   $             -    $     3,649

With the Public
Entity
     Medicare                              $    8,811     $      -     $      -    $     8,811   $       (1,595)    $     7,216
     Other                                      4,580           13            2          4,595             (908)          3,687
Non-Entity                                         52            2            -             54              (24)             30
Total With the Public                      $   13,443     $     15     $      2    $    13,460   $       (2,527)    $    10,933




                                                                     Penalties,
                                                                      Fines, &
                                          Accounts                     Admin       Accounts
                                          Receivable     Interest       Fees      Receivable,                       Net HHS
2012                                       Principal    Receivable   Receivable     Gross        Allowance         Receivables
Intragovernmental
Entity                                     $     814       $     -      $     -     $     814        $         -     $     814
Non-Entity                                         6             -            -             6                  -             6
Total, Intragovernmental                   $     820       $     -      $     -     $     820        $         -     $     820

With the Public
Entity
      Medicare                             $    9,014      $     -      $     -     $    9,014       $   (1,408)     $    7,606
      Other                                     3,882           11            3          3,896            (581)           3,315
Non-Entity                                        50             5            -            55               (33)            22
Total With the Public                      $   12,946     $     16      $     3     $   12,965       $   (2,022)     $   10,943




Department of Health and Human Services                                                    FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 97
                                                                                                                           FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 6. Inventory and Related Property, Net (in Millions)

                                                                                                                       2013                  2012
Inventory Held for Current Sale, Net                                                                               $       8             $     12
Operating Materials and Supplies Held for Use                                                                           113                   129
Stockpile Materials Held for Emergency or Contingency                                                                  8,481                 7,931
Inventory and Related Property, Net                                                                                $   8,602             $   8,072




Note 7. General Property, Plant and Equipment, Net (in Millions)


                                                                                                               2013


                                                                      Estimated                              Accumulated             Net Book
                                               Depreciation Method   Useful Lives     Acquisition Cost       Depreciation              Value
Land & Land Rights                                       -                -              $          52         $          -          $        52
Construction in Progress                                  -                -                      756                          -               756
Buildings, Facilities & Other Structures            Straight Line      5-50 Yrs                  5,747                 (2,448)               3,299
Equipment                                           Straight Line      3-20 Yrs                  1,861                 (1,087)                 774
Internal Use Software                               Straight Line      7-10 Yrs                  1,167                   (774)                 393
Assets Under Capital Lease (Note 15)                Straight Line      1-30 Yrs                   119                     (50)                  69
Leasehold Improvements                              Straight Line    *Life of Lease                50                     (29)                  21
Totals                                                                                    $      9,752         $       (4,388)       $       5,364




                                                                                                               2012


                                                                      Estimated                              Accumulated
                                               Depreciation Method   Useful Lives     Acquisition Cost       Depreciation          Net Book Value
Land & Land Rights                                       -                -              $          52         $          -          $         52
Construction in Progress                                  -                -                      704                          -               704
Buildings, Facilities & Other Structures            Straight Line      5-50 Yrs                  5,648                 (2,282)               3,366
Equipment                                           Straight Line      3-20 Yrs                  1,783                  (999)                  784
Internal Use Software                               Straight Line      7-10 Yrs                  1,131                  (732)                  399
Assets Under Capital Lease (Note 15)                Straight Line      1-30 Yrs                   119                     (46)                  73
Leasehold Improvements                              Straight Line    *Life of Lease                49                     (26)                  23
Totals                                                                                    $      9,486         $       (4,085)       $       5,401



*7 to 15 years or the life of the lease, whichever is shorter.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 98
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 8. Advances (in Millions)

                                                                                                   2013               2012
Intragovernmental
        Advances to Other Federal Entities                                                     $ 103              $      48


With the Public
     Travel Advances & Emergency Employee Salary Advances                                      $      1           $       1
     Part D Prescription Drug Plan                                                                    -               1,188

        Other Prepayments & Deferred Charges                                                         33
                                                                                                                         55

Total With the Public                                                                          $     34           $ 1,244



The decrease in advances is primarily due to the advance payments of $1.2 billion made in September of FY 2012
for Part D Prescription Drug Plan services provided in October of FY 2013. This advance payment was not necessary
in FY 2013.



Note 9. Liabilities Not Covered by Budgetary Resources (in Millions)

                                                                                       2013                           2012
Intragovernmental
     Accrued Payroll and Benefits                                                 $       63                  $          62
     Other                                                                               174                            170
Total Intragovernmental                                                           $      237                  $         232
Federal Employee and Veterans’ Benefits (Note 11)                                     11,566                          11,008
Accrued Payroll and Benefits                                                             603                            638
Contingencies and Commitments (Note 14)                                                8,900                           6,766
Other                                                                                    165                            110
Total Liabilities Not Covered by Budgetary Resources                              $   21,471                  $       18,754
Total Liabilities Covered by Budgetary Resources                                      86,038                          80,737
Total Liabilities                                                                 $ 107,509                   $       99,491




Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 99
                                                                                                                        FINANCIAL SECTION




Note 10. Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable (in Millions)

                                                                      2013            2012
                                        Medicare                 $    48,614      $   46,436
                                        Medicaid                      27,588          24,955
                                        Other                          1,075           1,102

                                        Totals                   $    77,277      $   72,493



Medicare benefits payable consists of a $38.7 billion estimate ($38.8 billion in FY 2012) of Medicare services
incurred, but not paid as of September 30, 2013, calculated by the CMS Office of the Actuary.

Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Program benefits payable consists of $8.2 billion in FY 2013 ($5.3
billion in FY 2012) consists of a $4.5 billion estimate ($2.8 billion in FY 2012) for amounts owed to plans relating to
risk and other payment-related adjustments and $3.7 billion in FY 2013 ($2.5 billion in FY 2012) owed to plans after
the completion of the Prescription Drug payment reconciliation.

The Medicare Retiree Drug Subsidy (RDS) consists of a $1.7 billion estimate ($2.4 billion in FY 2012) of payments to
plan sponsors of retiree prescription drug coverage incurred but not paid as of September 30, 2013. As part of the
Medicare Modernization Act, the RDS program makes subsidy payments available to sponsors of retiree
prescription drug coverage. The program is designed to strengthen employer- and union-based retiree prescription
drug plans.

Medicaid benefits payable of $27.6 billion as of September 30, 2013 ($25.0 billion in FY 2012) is an estimate of the
net federal share of expenses that have been incurred by the states but not yet reported to HHS. This estimate
incorporates claim activity tracked under Recovery Act of $0.2 billion ($0.2 billion in FY 2012). An estimated CHIP
benefits payable of $0.7 billion has been recorded as of September 30, 2013, ($0.7 billion in FY 2012) for the net
federal share of expenses that have been incurred by the states but not yet reported to HHS as of September 30,
2013.

Note 11. Federal Employee and Veterans’ Benefits (in Millions)


                                                                                               2013             2012
               With the Public
               Liabilities Not Covered by Budgetary Resources
                      PHS Commissioned Corp Pension Liability                         $    10,712         $    10,131
                      PHS Commissioned Corp Post-retirement Health Benefits                     561               603
                      Workers’ Compensation Benefits (Actuarial FECA Liability)                 293               274
               Total, Federal Employee and Veterans’ Benefits                         $    11,566         $    11,008



Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps
HHS administers the PHS Commissioned Corps Retirement System for 6,778 active duty officers and 6,330 retiree
annuitants and survivors. As of September 30, 2013, the actuarial accrued liability for the retirement benefit plan
was $10.7 billion and $0.6 billion for non-Medicare coverage of the Post-Retirement Medical Plan.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 100
                                                                                                        FINANCIAL SECTION



The Commission Corp Retirement System and Post-Retirement Benefits are not funded. Therefore, in accordance
with SFFAS Number 33, the discount rate should be based on long-term assumptions, for marketable securities
(such as Treasury marketable securities) of similar maturity to the period over which the payments are to be made.
The discount rates should be matched with the expected timing of the associated expected cashflow. A single
discount rate may be used for all the projected cashflows, if the resulting present value is not materially different
than the resulting present value using multiple rates.
The significant assumptions used in the calculation of the pension and medical program liability, as of September
30, 2013 and September 30, 2012, were:

                                                                   2013                    2012
                              Interest on federal securities    4.68 percent            4.88 percent
                              Annual basic pay scale increase   2.90 percent            2.92 percent
                              Annual inflation                  2.40 percent            2.42 percent

The following shows key valuation results as of September 30, 2013 and 2012, in conformance with the actuarial
reporting standards set forth in the SFFAS Number 5, Accounting for Liabilities of the Federal Government and
SFFAS Number 33, Pensions, Other Retirement Benefits and Other Postemployment Benefits: Reporting the Gains
and Losses from Changes in Assumptions and Selecting Discount Rates and Valuation Dates. The valuation is based
upon the current plan provisions, membership data collected as of June 30, 2013 and actuarial assumptions. The
September 30, 2013 valuation includes an increase in liabilities of $539 million resulting from an increase in costs
and an actuarial loss from changes in assumptions and experience. Volatility of the discount rate significantly
affects the liabilities for these benefits. Therefore, to mitigate the impact of this volatility, SFFAS Number 33 also
provides for the use of historical average rates to prevent the undue influence of current or near term rates.

                                                                                          2013                2012
Beginning Liability Balance                                                         $    10,734          $    9,950
Expense
     Normal Cost                                                                    $       263          $      240
     Interest on the liability balance                                                      491                 475
Actuarial (Gain)/Loss
     From experience                                                                        (18)                182
     From assumption changes
           Change in discount rate assumption                                               282                 294
           Change in inflation/salary increase assumption                                   (29)                (87)
           Change in Others                                                                  (5)                108
     Net Actuarial (Gain)/Loss                                                              230                 497
     Total expense                                                                  $       984          $    1,212
Less amounts paid                                                                          (445)               (428)
Ending Liability Balance                                                            $    11,273          $   10,734



Workers’ Compensation Benefits
The actuarial liability for future workers’ compensation benefits includes the expected liability for death, disability,
medical and miscellaneous costs for approved compensation cases, plus a component for incurred but not
reported claims. The liability utilizes historical benefit payment patterns to predict the ultimate payment related to
that period. In FY 2013, the fund effected a change in accounting estimate to refine the methodology used for
selecting the interest rate assumptions and enhance matching between the timing of cash flows and interest rates.
For FY 2013, projected annual payments were discounted to present value based on OMB's interest rate
assumptions which were interpolated to reflect the average duration in years for income payments and medical


Department of Health and Human Services                                                 FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 101
                                                                                                                               FINANCIAL SECTION



payments. In FY 2012 and prior years, these projected annual benefit payments were discounted to present value
using OMB's economic assumptions for 10-year Treasury notes and bonds. Interest rate assumptions utilized for
discounting as of September 30, 2013 and September 30, 2012 appear below.

                                                            2013                                       2012
                                                      2.727% in Year 1                         2.293% in Year 1
                          Wage Benefits
                                                3.127% in Year 2 and thereafter          3.138% in Year 2 and thereafter

                                                      2.334% in Year 1                         2.293% in Year 1
                          Medical Benefits
                                                2.860% in Year 2 and thereafter          3.138% in Year 2 and thereafter


To provide specifically for the effects of inflation on the liability for future workers’ compensation benefits, wage
inflation factors, cost of living adjustments (COLA) and medical inflation factors such as consumer price index-
medical (CPIM) are applied to the calculations for projected future benefits. These factors are also used to adjust
historical payments to current year dollars. The anticipated percentages for COLA and CPIM used in projections
are:

                                                  FY               COLA                 CPIM
                                                 2013               N/A                  N/A
                                                 2014              1.67%                3.46%
                                                 2015              1.80%                3.82%
                                                 2016              2.20%                3.83%
                                                 2017              2.20%                3.82%
                                                 2018              2.20%                3.82%



Note 12. Accrued Grant Liability (in Millions)

                                                                                                                      2013                   2012
Estimated Accrual for Amounts Due to Grantees                                                                   $    22,410            $    21,994
Offsetting Grant Advances                                                                                           (18,461)               (18,246)
Net Accrued Grant Liability                                                                                     $     3,949            $     3,748




Note 13. Other Liabilities (in Millions)


                                                                           2013                                            2012
                                                             Intra-                   With the              Intra-                    With the
                                                          governmental                 Public            governmental                  Public
Accrued Payroll & Benefits                                  $          101        $              983      $            115        $           1,103
Advances from Others                                                   360                       98                    315                       125
Deferred Revenue                                                           -                     445                       -                     455
Capital Lease Liability (Note 15)                                         59                     19                     63                       20
Custodial Liabilities                                                  930                       18                    736                       15
Other                                                                  559                     1,018                   201                    1,244
Total Other Liabilities                                     $         2,009       $            2,581      $          1,430        $           2,962




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 102
                                                                                                          FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 14. Contingencies and Commitments

HHS is a party in various administrative proceedings, legal actions and tort claims which may ultimately result in
settlements or decisions adverse to the Federal Government. HHS has accrued contingent liabilities where a loss is
determined to be probable and the amount can be estimated. Other contingencies exist where losses are
reasonably possible and an estimate can be determined or an estimate of the range of possible liability has been
determined. Selected contingencies and commitments are described below.

Medicaid Audit and Program Disallowances
The Medicaid amount of $6.1 billion ($3.9 billion in FY 2012) consists of Medicaid audit and program disallowances
of $3.0 billion ($1.9 billion in FY 2012) and of $3.1 billion ($2.0 billion in FY 2012) for reimbursement of State Plan
amendments. Contingent liabilities have been established as a result of Medicaid audit and program disallowances
that are currently being appealed by the States. In all cases, the funds have been returned to HHS. HHS will be
required to pay these amounts if the appeals are decided in favor of the States. In addition, certain amounts for
payment have been deferred under the Medicaid program when there is a reasonable doubt as to the legitimacy
of expenditures claimed by a State. There are also outstanding reviews of the State expenditures in which a final
determination has not been made.

Appeals at the Provider Reimbursement Review Board
Other liabilities do not include all provider cost reports under appeal at the Provider Reimbursement Review Board
(PRRB). The monetary effect of those appeals is generally not known until a decision is rendered. However,
historical cases that have been appealed and settled by the PRRB are considered in the development of the
actuarial Medicare IBNR liability, resulting in a projected liability for the 7,124 cases (5,041 in FY 2012) remaining
on appeal as of September 30, 2013. In FY 2013, a total of 3,907 new cases were filed (652 in FY 2012). The PRRB
rendered decisions on 210 cases in FY 2013 (98 in FY 2012); and 1,623 additional cases (2,215 in FY 2012) were
dismissed, withdrawn or settled prior to an appeal hearing. The PRRB receives no information on the value of cases
that are settled prior to a hearing.

Other Accrued Contingent Liabilities
The U.S. Supreme Court decision in Salazar v. Ramah Navajo Chapter, dated June 18, 2012, is likely to result in
increased claims against the Indian Health Service. Tribes are expected to file claims for prior years and seek to
consolidate their claims in a class action lawsuit. It is not clear if these will be filed as administrative cases or filed
in Federal District Court. An estimated loss relating to this matter is accrued in the financial statements.
The Vaccine Injury Compensation Program is administered by HRSA and provides compensation for vaccine-related
injury or death. A contingent liability has been accrued in the financial statements for the estimated future
payment of injury claims.

Obligations Related to Canceled Appropriations
Payments may be required of up to one percent of current year appropriations for valid obligations incurred
against prior year appropriations that have been canceled pursuant to the National Defense Authorization Act. The
total potential payments related to canceled appropriations are estimated at $1.1 billion as of both September 30,
2013 and 2012.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                   FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 103
                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 15. Leases (in Millions)

Capital Leases
HHS has entered into various capital leases with private entities and with the General Services Administration
(GSA) for offices and laboratory space. Lease terms vary from one to 30 years. Capitalized assets acquired under
capital lease agreements and the related liabilities are reported at the present value of the minimum lease
payments. Assets under Capital Lease amounts are reported in Note 7, General Property, Plant and Equipment.

Operating Leases
HHS has commitments under various operating leases with private entities and GSA for offices, laboratory space
and land. Leases with private entities have initial or remaining non-cancelable lease terms from 1 to 50 years. The
GSA leases, in general, are cancelable with 120 days’ notice and not included in the table below. Under an
operating lease, the cost of the lease is expensed as incurred.

Future Minimum Payments
                                                                           2013            2012
                      Year 1                                           $     89       $      85
                      Year 2                                                 93              81
                      Year 3                                                 90              81
                      Year 4                                                 69              80
                      Year 5                                                 70              79
                      After 5 Years                                         444             482
                      Total Operating Lease Liability                  $    855        $    888




Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 104
                                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL SECTION




Note 16. Revenue (in Millions)

2013 Consolidated Gross Cost and Exchange Revenue by Budget Function Classification

                                Education
                                Training &                                                                           OPDIV
                                  Social                                                    Income                  Combined           Intra-HHS             Consolidated
                                 Services            Health           Medicare              Security                 Totals           Eliminations              Totals
Intragovernmental
  Gross Cost                    $       141      $         5,736      $         1,022       $           56          $        6,955     $     (2,684)              $     4,271

  Exchange Revenue                     (38)              (3,179)                  (43)                 (10)                 (3,270)           2,495                      (775)

  Net Cost, Intragovernmental   $       103      $         2,557      $           979       $           46          $        3,685     $       (189)              $     3,496

With the Public

  Gross Cost                    $    13,556      $ 347,006            $       566,826       $        38,318         $      965,706    $                  -        $   965,706

  Exchange Revenue                           -           (3,704)              (69,229)                 (19)                (72,952)                      -            (72,952)

  Net Cost, With the Public     $    13,556      $ 343,302            $       497,597       $        38,299         $      892,754    $                  -        $   892,754

Total Gross Cost                $    13,697      $ 352,742            $       567,848       $        38,374         $      972,661     $     (2,684)              $   969,977

Total Exchange Revenue                 (38)              (6,883)              (69,272)                 (29)                (76,222)           2,495                   (73,727)

Total Net Cost of Operations    $    13,659      $ 345,859            $       498,576       $        38,345         $      896,439     $       (189)              $   896,250



2012 Consolidated Gross Cost and Exchange Revenue by Budget Function Classification

                                Education
                                Training &                                                                               OPDIV
                                  Social                                                            Income              Combined       Intra-HHS             Consolidated
                                 Services                Health               Medicare              Security             Totals       Eliminations              Totals
Intragovernmental

  Gross Cost                    $       108          $       5,809        $        1,013        $             35    $        6,965     $    (2,660)           $         4,305

  Exchange Revenue                      (42)                (3,080)                  (19)                     (9)           (3,150)          2,502                      (648)

  Net Cost, Intragovernmental   $        66          $       2,729        $          994        $             26    $        3,815     $      (158)           $         3,657

With the Public
  Gross Cost                    $    13,240          $     327,474        $      541,532        $      37,298       $      919,544     $             -        $       919,544

  Exchange Revenue                       (2)                (2,808)             (64,839)                      (5)          (67,654)                  -                (67,654)

  Net Cost, With the Public     $    13,238          $     324,666        $      476,693        $      37,293       $      851,890     $             -        $       851,890

Total Gross Cost                $    13,348          $     333,283        $      542,545        $      37,333       $      926,509     $    (2,660)           $       923,849

Total Exchange Revenue                  (44)                (5,888)             (64,858)                  (14)             (70,804)          2,502                    (68,302)

Total Net Cost of Operations    $    13,304          $     327,395        $      477,687        $      37,319       $      855,705     $      (158)           $       855,547


Exchange Revenue
HHS recognizes its revenue from exchange transactions when goods and services are provided. Total exchange
revenue was $73.7 billion and $68.3 billion through September 30, 2013 and 2012, respectively. HHS’ exchange
revenue consists primarily of Medicare premiums collected from beneficiaries. HHS also charges user fees and
collects revenues related to reimbursable agreements with other government entities.



Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 105
                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 17. Terms of Borrowing Authority Used and Available Borrowing Authority

HHS has indefinite borrowing authority for direct and guaranteed loan programs discussed in Note 1 Section G.

Requirements for Repayments of Borrowings
Borrowings are repaid on nonexpenditure transfers as maturity dates become due. For financing accounts,
maturity dates are based on the period of time used in the subsidy calculation, not the contractual term of the
loans. There has been repayment of debt in the amount of $0.2 billion FY 2013 (none in FY 2012). As of September
30, 2013, HHS had borrowing authority available of $0.2 billion ($3.1 billion in FY 2012).

Financing Sources for Repayments of Borrowings
HHS will use interest received as well as principal repayments on direct loans to repay debt in the non-budgetary
direct loan program financing accounts. HHS will also use residual unobligated balances, where applicable, as
another source for repayment.

Other Terms of Borrowing Authority Used
In general, borrowings are for periods of between one year and approximately 50 years depending upon the loan
program/cohort. Interest rates on borrowings in the financing accounts are assigned on the basis of the Treasury
rate in effect during the period of loan disbursements. Some individual loans are disbursed over several quarters
or years. Consequently, several interest rates can be applicable to an individual loan. Thus, a single weighted
average interest rate is maintained for each cohort and is adjusted each year until the disbursements for the
cohort have been made. Each year, the current average annual interest rate is weighted by current year
disbursements and merged with the prior years’ weighted average to calculate a new weighted average.

Non-Budgetary Credit Reform Financing Account
The negative balance for borrowing authority of $2.1 billion under the FY 2013 Non-Budgetary Credit Reform
Financing Account column on the Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources reflects an adjustment occurring in
the current year to return FY 2012 indefinite borrowing authority of $2.2 billion that should have been made at
September 30, 2012. In addition, the negative balance of $0.7 billion for spending authority from offsetting
collections under that column represents a reduction to unfilled orders for a $0.9 billion overstatement at
September 30, 2012. These adjustments were immaterial to the HHS financial statements and do not warrant a
restatement.




Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 106
                                                                                                           FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 18. Apportionment Categories of Obligations Incurred and Undelivered Orders (in Millions)

                                                                                                 2013
                                                                            Direct          Reimbursable             Total
Category A (Distributed by Quarter)                                         $    90,955          $      7,287    $      98,242
Category B (Restricted and Distributed by Activity)                             637,450                 1,973          639,423
Exempt from Apportionment                                                       544,371                     -          544,371
     Total Obligations Incurred                                             $ 1,272,776          $      9,260    $ 1,282,036


                                                                                                 2012
                                                                            Direct          Reimbursable             Total
Category A (Distributed by Quarter)                                         $    94,380          $      7,310     $    101,690
Category B (Restricted and Distributed by Activity)                             590,300                  936           591,236
Exempt from Apportionment                                                       512,954                     -          512,954
     Total Obligations Incurred                                             $ 1,197,634          $      8,246     $ 1,205,880




Obligations incurred consist of expended authority and the change in undelivered orders. OMB has exempted CMS
from the OMB Circular Number A-11, Preparation, Submission and Execution of the Budget, requirement to report
Medicare’s refunds of prior year obligations separately from refunds of current year obligations on the SF-133,
Report on Budget Execution and Budgetary Resources.

Undelivered Orders include obligations that have been issued but are not yet drawn down and goods and services
ordered that have not been received. HHS reported $93.3 billion of budgetary resources obligated for undelivered
orders as of September 30, 2013 and $96.8 billion as of September 30, 2012.



Note 19. Legal Arrangements Affecting Use of Unobligated Balances

The unobligated balances at year end on the Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources consist of trust funds,
appropriated funds, revolving funds, management funds, gift funds, Cooperative Research and Development
Agreement (CRADA) funds and royalty funds. Annual appropriations are available for new obligations in the year of
appropriation and for adjustments to valid obligations for five subsequent years. Other appropriations are
available for obligation for multiple years or until expended based on Congressional authority.
All trust fund receipts collected in the fiscal year are reported as new budget authority in the Combined Statement
of Budgetary Resources. The portion of trust fund receipts collected in the fiscal year that exceeds the amount
needed to pay benefits and other valid obligations in that fiscal year is precluded by law from being available for
obligation. This excess of receipts over obligations is Temporarily Not Available Pursuant to Public Law and is
included in the calculation for appropriations on the Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources and, therefore,
is not classified as budgetary resources in the fiscal year collected. However, all such excess receipts are assets of
the trust funds and become available for obligation as needed. The entire trust fund balances in the amount of
$245.0 billion as of September 30, 2013, ($245.4 billion in FY 2012) are included in Investments on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                   FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 107
                                                                                                           FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 20. Explanation of Differences between the Combined Statement of Budgetary
Resources and the Budget of the United States Government (in Millions)

The Budget of the United States Government (also known as the President’s Budget), with the actual amounts for
FY 2013, has not been published, therefore, no comparisons can be made between FY 2013 amounts presented in
the Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources with amounts reported in the Actual column of the President’s
Budget. The FY 2015 President’s Budget is expected to be released in February 2014 and may be obtained from
OMB’s website, http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget, or from the Government Printing Office.

HHS reconciled the amounts of the FY 2012 column on the Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources to the
actual amounts for FY 2012 from the Appendix in the FY 2014 President’s Budget for budgetary resources,
obligations incurred, offsetting receipts and net outlays (gross outlays less offsetting collections) as presented
below.

                                                                                                          Net Outlays
                                                                                      Distributed       (Gross Outlays
                                                   Budgetary        Obligations       Offsetting        less Offsetting
   2012                                            Resources         Incurred          Receipts           Collections)
   Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources   $    1,289,835   $    1,205,880    $     317,777        $     1,165,973
     Expired Accounts                                 (8,390)             -                 -                     -
     Other                                            (1,284)             (52)             (269)                (332)
   Budget of the U.S. Government               $    1,280,161   $    1,205,828    $     317,508        $     1,165,641



For the budgetary resources reconciliation, the amount used from the President’s Budget was the total budgetary
resources available for obligation. Therefore, a reconciling item that is contained in the Combined Statement of
Budgetary Resources and not in the President’s Budget is the budgetary resources that were not available. The
Expired Accounts line in the above schedule includes expired authority, recoveries and other amounts included in
the Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources that are not included in the President’s Budget.

The Other differences in the budgetary resources include an adjustment made to CMS CO-OP subsidy calculation in
the amount of $0.9 billion reported in the President's Budget, an adjustment made to reclassify credit balance in
the upward adjustments of prior-year undelivered orders account to the downward adjustments of prior-year
unpaid undelivered orders account, and a back dated warrant processed for the Payments to Health Care Trust
Funds during the SF-133 revision window.

The Other differences in the offsetting receipts consist of General Fund Proprietary Receipts and Collections of
Receivables from Canceled Accounts, and a back dated warrant processed for the Payments from the General Fund
for Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control Account. In addition, NIH made adjustments to prior year entry recorded
in the Combined Statement of Budgetary Resources but not included in the President's Budget and other
differences related to Intra-Departmental Delegation of Authority in the Combined Statement of Budgetary
Resources.

Lastly, the Other differences in the net outlays include outlays reported on the HHS’ Combined Statement of
Budgetary Resources and included in the Department of Homeland Security’s President’s Budget for Project
Bioshield, and a back dated warrant processed for the Payments to Health Care Trust Funds during the revision
window.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 108
                                                                                                          FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 21. Funds from Dedicated Collections (in Millions)

Medicare is the largest dedicated collections fund group managed by HHS and is presented in a separate column in
the schedule below. The Medicare programs include the HI Trust Fund, the Medicare SMI Trust Fund, the Medicare
SMI Prescription Drug Benefit – Part D and the Medicare Integrity Program. See Note 1 Section F for a description
of each fund’s purpose and how HHS accounts for and reports the fund. Portions of the Program Management
appropriation have been allocated to the HI and SMI Trust Funds.

SMI benefits and administrative expenses are generally financed by monthly premiums paid by Medicare
beneficiaries and are matched by the Federal Government through the General Fund Appropriation, Payments to
the Health Care Trust Funds. The standard monthly SMI premium per beneficiary was $104.90 for January 1, 2013,
through September 30, 2013 and $99.90 from October 1, 2012, through December 31, 2012. The funds from
dedicated collections financial statement balances are shown below.

 Consolidated Balance Sheet as of September 30
                                                                                                  2013
                                                                               Medicare           Other            Total
 Fund Balance with Treasury                                                   $      9,448    $      2,711     $     12,159
 Investments                                                                       276,173           3,452          279,625
 Other Assets                                                                       11,025            215            11,240
      Total Assets                                                            $ 296,646       $      6,378     $ 303,024


 Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable                                         $     48,614    $         -      $     48,614
 Other Liabilities                                                                   5,318            627             5,945
      Total Liabilities                                                       $     53,932    $       627      $     54,559


 Unexpended Appropriations                                                    $      4,569    $      (100)     $      4,469
 Cumulative Results of Operations                                                  238,145           5,851          243,996
      Total Liabilities and Net Position                                      $ 296,646       $      6,378     $ 303,024


 Consolidated Statement of Net Cost for the Period Ended September 30
 Gross Program Costs                                                          $ 567,848       $        738     $ 568,586
 Less: Exchange Revenues                                                         69,272              1,978        71,250
 Net Cost of Operations                                                       $ 498,576       $    (1,240)     $ 497,336


 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net Position for the Period Ended
 September 30
 Net Position Beginning of Period                                             $ 282,319       $      5,108     $ 287,427
      Non-Exchange Revenue                                                    $ 229,649       $       269      $ 229,918
      Other Financing Sources                                                      229,322           (866)          228,456
      Net Cost of Operations                                                      (498,576)          1,240         (497,336)
 Change in Net Position                                                       $ (39,605)      $       643      $ (38,962)
 Net Position End of Period                                                   $ 242,714       $      5,751     $ 248,465




Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 109
                                                                                                          FINANCIAL SECTION



 Consolidated Balance Sheet as of September 30
                                                                                                  2012
                                                                               Medicare           Other            Total
 Fund Balance with Treasury                                                   $     23,254    $      1,935     $     25,189
 Investments                                                                       300,809           3,477          304,286
 Other Assets                                                                        8,651            255             8,906
      Total Assets                                                            $ 332,714       $      5,667     $ 338,381


 Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable                                         $     46,436    $         -      $     46,436
 Other Liabilities                                                                   3,959            559             4,518
      Total Liabilities                                                       $     50,395    $       559      $     50,954


 Unexpended Appropriations                                                    $     20,519    $     (101)      $     20,418
 Cumulative Results of Operations                                                  261,800          5,209           267,009
      Total Liabilities and Net Position                                      $ 332,714       $      5,667     $ 338,381


 Consolidated Statement of Net Cost for the Period Ended September 30
 Gross Program Costs                                                          $ 542,545       $        308     $ 542,853
 Less: Exchange Revenues                                                         64,858              1,497        66,355
 Net Cost of Operations                                                       $ 477,687       $    (1,189)     $ 476,498


 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net Position for the Period Ended
 September 30
 Net Position Beginning of Period                                             $ 293,197       $      4,401     $ 297,598
      Non-Exchange Revenue                                                    $ 221,987       $       326      $ 222,313
      Other Financing Sources                                                      244,822           (808)          244,014
      Net Cost of Operations                                                      (477,687)          1,189         (476,498)
 Change in Net Position                                                        $ (10,878)     $       707      $ (10,171)
 Net Position End of Period                                                   $ 282,319       $      5,108     $ 287,427




Note 22. Statement of Social Insurance (Unaudited)

The SOSI presents the projected 75-year actuarial present values of the income and expenditures of the HI and SMI
Trust Funds. Future expenditures are expected to arise from the health care payment provisions specified in
current law for current and future program participants and from associated administrative expenses. Actuarial
present values are computed on the basis of the intermediate set of assumptions specified in the Annual Report of
the Medicare Board of Trustees. These assumptions represent the Trustees’ best estimate of likely future
economic, demographic, and health care-specific conditions. As with all of the assumptions underlying the
Trustees’ financial projections, the Medicare-specific assumptions are reviewed annually and updated based on
the latest available data and analysis of trends. In addition, the assumptions and projection methodology are
subject to periodic review by independent panels of expert actuaries and economists. The most recent review
occurred with the 2010-2011 Technical Review Panel. Please see Note 23 below for further information on this
panel (“the Panel”).




Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 110
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



The SOSI projections are based on current law, and reflect the effects of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, which is referred to collectively as
the “Affordable Care Act.” The Affordable Care Act improves the financial outlook for Medicare substantially;
however, the full effects of some of the law’s provisions on Medicare are not known at this time, with the result
that the projections are very uncertain, especially in the long-range future. It is important to note that the
substantially improved results for HI and SMI Part B depend in part on the long-range feasibility of lower increases
in Medicare payment rates to most categories of providers, as mandated by the Affordable Care Act. Without
fundamental change in the current delivery system, these adjustments would probably not be viable indefinitely.
Please see Note 23 below for further information on the impact of the Affordable Care Act.
Actuarial present values are computed as of the year shown and over the 75-year projection period, beginning
January 1 of that year. The Trustees’ projections are based on the current Medicare laws, regulations, and policies
in effect on May 31, 2013, and do not reflect any actual or anticipated changes subsequent to that date. The
present values are calculated by discounting the future annual amounts of non-interest income and expenditures
(including benefit payments as well as administrative expenses) at the projected average rates of interest credited
to the HI Trust Fund. HI income includes the portion of FICA and SECA payroll taxes allocated to the HI Trust Fund,
the portion of Federal income taxes paid on Social Security benefits that is allocated to the HI Trust Fund, and
receipts from fraud and abuse control activities. SMI income includes premiums paid by, or on behalf of,
beneficiaries and transfers from the general fund of the Treasury made on behalf of beneficiaries. Fees related to
brand-name prescription drugs, required by the Affordable Care Act, are included as income for Part B of SMI, and
transfers from state governments are included as income for Part D of SMI. Since all major sources of income to
the trust funds are reflected, the actuarial projections can be used to assess the financial condition of each trust
fund.

The Part A present values in the SOSI exclude the income and expenditures for the roughly 1 percent of
beneficiaries who are 65 or over but are “uninsured” because they do not meet the normal insured status or
related requirements to qualify for entitlement to Part A benefits. The primary purpose of the SOSI is to compare
the projected future costs of Medicare with the program’s scheduled revenues. Since costs for the uninsured are
separately funded either through general revenue appropriations or through premium payments, the exclusion of
such amounts does not materially affect the financial balance of Part A. In addition, such individuals are granted
coverage outside of the social insurance framework underlying Medicare Part A. For these reasons, it is
appropriate to exclude their income and expenditures from the Statement of Social Insurance.

Actuarial present values of estimated future income (excluding interest) and estimated future expenditures are
presented for three different groups of participants: (1) current participants who have not yet attained eligibility
age; (2) current participants who have attained eligibility age; and (3) new entrants, those who are expected to
become participants in the future. Current participants are the “closed group” of individuals who are at least age
15 at the start of the projection period, and are participating in the program as either taxpayers, beneficiaries, or
both.
The SOSI sets forth, for each of these three groups, the projected actuarial present values of all future
expenditures and of all future non-interest income for the next 75 years. The SOSI also presents the net present
values of future net cash flows, which are calculated by subtracting the actuarial present value of future
expenditures from the actuarial present value of future income. The HI Trust Fund is expected to have an actuarial
deficit indicating that, under these assumptions as to economic, demographic, and health care cost trends for the
future, HI income is expected to fall short of expenditures over the next 75 years. Neither Part B nor Part D of SMI
has similar problems because each account is automatically in financial balance every year due to its statutory
financing mechanism.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 111
                                                                                                     FINANCIAL SECTION



In addition to the actuarial present value of the estimated future excess of income (excluding interest) over
expenditures for the open group of participants, the SOSI also sets forth the same calculation for the “closed
group” of participants. The “closed group” of participants consists of those who, in the starting year of the
projection period, have attained retirement eligibility age or have attained ages 15 through 64. In order to
calculate the actuarial net present value of the excess of future income over future expenditures for the closed
group, the actuarial present value of estimated future expenditures for or on behalf of current participants is
subtracted from the actuarial present value of future income (excluding interest) for current participants.
Since its enactment in 1965, the Medicare program has experienced substantial variability in expenditure growth
rates. These different rates of growth have reflected new developments in medical care, demographic factors
affecting the relative number and average age of beneficiaries and covered workers, and numerous economic
factors. The future cost of Medicare will also be affected by further changes in these factors that are inherently
uncertain. Consequently, Medicare’s actual cost over time, especially for periods as long as 75 years, cannot be
predicted with certainty and such actual cost could differ materially from the projections shown in the SOSI.
Moreover, these differences could affect the long-term sustainability of this social insurance program. Please see
Note 23 below for important information on the further uncertainty, resulting from the provisions in the
Affordable Care Act, associated with the current-law projections presented in the SOSI. In order to make
projections regarding the future financial status of the HI and SMI Trust Funds, various assumptions have to be
made. As stated previously, the estimates presented here are based on the assumption that the trust funds will
continue to operate under the law in effect on May 31, 2013. In addition, the estimates depend on many
economic, demographic, and health care-specific assumptions, including changes in per beneficiary health care
cost, wages, and the consumer price index (CPI), fertility rates, mortality rates, immigration rates, and interest
rates. In most cases, these assumptions vary from year to year during the first 5 to 30 years before reaching their
ultimate values for the remainder of the 75-year projection period. The assumed growth rates for per beneficiary
health care costs vary throughout the projection period.
The most significant underlying assumptions, based on current law, used in the projections of Medicare spending
displayed in this section, are included in the following table. The assumptions underlying the 2013 SOSI actuarial
projections are drawn from the Social Security and Medicare Trustees Reports for 2013. Specific assumptions are
made for each of the different types of service provided by the Medicare program (for example, hospital care and
physician services). These assumptions include changes in the payment rates, utilization, and intensity of each type
of service. The projected beneficiary cost increases summarized on the next page reflect the overall impact of
these more detailed assumptions. Detailed information, similar to that denoted within Table 1, for the prior years
is publicly available on the CMS website at: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/CFOReport/.




Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 112
                                                                                                                            FINANCIAL SECTION



                        Table 1: Significant Assumptions and Summary Measures Used for the
                                           Statement of Social Insurance 2013

                                                                                  Annual percentage change in:
                                                                                                    Per beneficiary cost8
            Fertility         Net        Mortalit     Real-wage                            Real                  SMI              Real-interest
             rate1        immigration2   y rate3      differential4    Wages5      CPI6   GDP7       HI     B         D              rate9

 2013         1.91          1,155,000     722.2           0.87          2.67       1.80       2.2      −0.9      0.4       0.3         −0.3

 2020         2.06          1,255,000     670.2           1.35          4.15       2.80       2.3      3.9       5.3       6.6          2.8

 2030         2.03          1,115,000     613.0           1.20          4.00       2.80       2.0      4.7       4.9       5.5          2.9

 2040         2.00          1,080,000     564.1           1.15          3.95       2.80       2.2      5.3       4.5       5.3          2.9

 2050         2.00          1,065,000     521.1           1.11          3.91       2.80       2.1      4.2       4.1       5.0          2.9

 2060         2.00          1,060,000     483.3           1.10          3.90       2.80       2.0      3.9       4.0       4.8          2.9

 2070         2.00          1,055,000     449.7           1.10          3.90       2.80       2.1      4.1       4.0       4.7          2.9

 2080        2.00           1,055,000        419.8           1.13          3.93       2.80      2.1      3.8      3.8        4.5         2.9
 1Average  number of children per woman.
 2Includes legal immigration, net of emigration, as well as other, non-legal, immigration.
 3The age-sex-adjusted death rate per 100,000 that would occur in the enumerated population as of April 1, 2000, if that population were to

 experience the death rates by age and sex observed in, or assumed for, the selected year.
 4Difference between percentage increases in wages and the CPI.
 5Average annual wage in covered employment.
 6Consumer price index represents a measure of the average change in prices over time in a fixed group of goods and services.
 7The total dollar value of all goods and services produced in the United States, adjusted to remove the impact of assumed inflation growth.
 8These increases reflect the overall impact of more detailed assumptions that are made for each of the different types of service provided by

 the Medicare program (for example, hospital care, physician services, and pharmaceutical costs). These assumptions include changes in the
 payment rates, utilization, and intensity of each type of service.
 9Average rate of interest earned on new trust fund securities, above and beyond rate of inflation.




The projections presented in the Statement of Social Insurance are based on various economic and demographic
assumptions. The values for each of these assumptions move from recently experienced levels or trends toward
long-range ultimate values. These ultimate values assumed for the current year and the prior four years are
summarized in Table 2 on the next page. They are based on the intermediate assumptions of the respective
Medicare Trustees Reports.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 113
                                                                                                                             FINANCIAL SECTION



                              Table 2: Significant Ultimate Assumptions Used for the
                                   Statement of Social Insurance, FY 2013-2009

                                                                                 Annual percentage change in:
                                                                                                  Per beneficiary cost8
                                                                                                               SMI
          Fertility       Net           Mortality     Real-wage                          Real                                     Real-interest
           rate1      immigration2       rate3        differential4   Wages5     CPI6 GDP7        HI       B        D                rate9
FY 2013       2.0        1,055,000          419.8           1.1           3.93       2.8       2.1      3.8       3.8       4.5           2.9
FY 2012       2.0        1,030,000          446.0           1.1           3.92       2.8       2.0      3.7       3.8       4.5           2.9
FY 2011       2.0        1,030,000          443.2           1.2            4.0       2.8       2.1      3.3       3.7       4.4           2.9
FY 2010       2.0        1,025,000          446.1           1.2            4.0       2.8       2.1      3.3       3.8       4.4           2.9
FY 2009       2.0        1,025,000          458.2           1.1            3.9       2.8       2.1      4.4       4.3       4.3           2.9
 1Average number of children per woman. The ultimate fertility rate is assumed to be reached in the 25th year of the projection period.
 2Includes legal immigration, net of emigration, as well as other, non-legal, immigration. The ultimate level of net legal immigration is 790,000

 persons per year and the assumption for annual net other immigration varies throughout the projection period. Therefore, the assumption
 presented is the value assumed in the year 2080.
 3The age-sex-adjusted death rate per 100,000 that would occur in the enumerated population as of April 1, 2000, if that population were to

 experience the death rates by age and sex observed in, or assumed for, the selected year. The annual rate declines gradually during the
 entire period so no ultimate rate is achieved. The assumption presented is the value assumed in the year 2080.
 4Difference between percentage increases in wages and the CPI. The value presented is the average of annual real-wage differentials for the

 last 65 years of the 75-year projection period, is consistent with the annual differentials shown in table 1, and is displayed to two decimal
 places. The assumption varies slightly throughout the projection period. Therefore, the assumption presented is the value assumed in the
 year 2080.
 5Average annual wage in covered employment. The value presented is the average annual percentage change from the 10th year of the 75-

 year projection period to the 75th year, and is displayed to two decimal places. The assumption varies slightly throughout the projection
 period. Therefore, the assumption presented is the value assumed in the year 2080.
 6Consumer price index represents a measure of the average change in prices over time in a fixed group of goods and services. The ultimate

 assumption is reached within the first 10 years of the projection period.
 7The total dollar value of all goods and services produced in the United States, adjusted to remove the impact of assumed inflation growth.

 The annual rate declines gradually during the entire period so no ultimate rate is achieved. The assumption presented is the value assumed
 in the year 2080.
 8These increases reflect the overall impact of more detailed assumptions that are made for each of the different types of service provided by

 the Medicare program (for example, hospital care, physician services, and pharmaceutical costs). These assumptions include changes in the
 payment rates, utilization, and intensity of each type of service. The annual rate of growth declines gradually during the entire period so no
 ultimate rate is achieved. The assumption presented is the value assumed in the year 2080.
 9Average rate of interest earned on new trust fund securities, above and beyond rate of inflation. The ultimate assumption is reached soon

 after the 10th year of each projection period.


Part D Projections
In addition to the inherent variability that underlies the expenditure projections prepared for all parts of Medicare,
the Part D program is still relatively new (having begun operations in January 2006), with relatively little actual
program data currently available. The actual 2006 through 2013 bid submissions by the private plans offering this
coverage, together with actual data on beneficiary enrollment and program spending through 2012, have been
used in the current projections. Nevertheless, there remains a high level of uncertainty surrounding these cost
projections, pending the availability of sufficient data on actual Part D expenditures to establish a trend baseline.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                    FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 114
                                                                                                       FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 23. Affordable Care Act and SMI Part B Physician Payment Update Factor (Unaudited)

The financial projections for the Medicare program reflect substantial, but very uncertain, cost savings deriving
from provisions of the Affordable Care Act. It is important to note, however, that these improved results for HI and
SMI Part B since 2010 depend in part on the long-range feasibility of the various cost-saving measures in the
Affordable Care Act—in particular, the lower increases in Medicare payment rates to most categories of health
care providers. Without fundamental change in the current delivery system, these adjustments would probably
not be viable indefinitely. It is possible that health care providers could improve their productivity, reduce wasteful
expenditures, and take other steps to keep their cost growth within the bounds imposed by the Medicare price
limitations. For such efforts to be successful in the long range, however, providers would have to generate and
sustain unprecedented levels of productivity gains—a very challenging and uncertain prospect.

A transformation of health care in the U.S., affecting both the means of delivery and the method of paying for care,
is also a possibility. The Affordable Care Act takes important steps in this direction by initiating programs of
research into innovative payment and service delivery models, such as accountable care organizations, patient-
centered “medical homes,” improvement in care coordination for individuals with multiple chronic health
conditions, improvement in coordination of post-acute care, payment bundling, “pay for performance,” and
assistance for individuals in making informed health choices. If researchers and policy makers can demonstrate
that the new approaches developed through these initiatives will improve the quality of health care and/or reduce
costs, then the Secretary of Health and Human Services can adopt them for Medicare without further legislation.
Such changes have the potential to reduce health care costs and cost growth rates and could, as a result, help
lower Medicare cost growth rates to levels compatible with the lower price updates payable under current law.

The ability of new delivery and payment methods to significantly lower cost growth rates is uncertain at this time,
since specific changes have not yet been designed, tested, or evaluated. Hopes for success are high, but at this
time there is insufficient evidence to support an assumption that improvements in efficiency can occur of the
magnitude needed to align with the statutory Medicare price updates.

The reductions in provider payments updates, if implemented for all future years as required under current law,
could have secondary impacts on provider participation, beneficiary access to care; quality of services; and other
factors. These possible impacts are very speculative, and at present there is no consensus among experts as to
their potential scope. Further research and analysis will help to better inform this issue and may enable the
development of specific projections of secondary effects under current law in the future.

In addition, the Medicare Part B projections reflect a reduction of almost 25 percent in payment rates for physician
services in 2014, as required under current law. If lawmakers act to prevent this decrease, as they have for 2003
through 2013, then actual Part B and total SMI costs will significantly exceed the projections shown in this report.

Because knowledge of the potential long-range effects of the productivity adjustments, delivery and payment
innovations, and certain other aspects of the Affordable Care Act is so limited, in August 2010 the Secretary of the
Department of Health and Human Services, working on behalf of the Board of Trustees, established an
independent group of expert actuaries and economists to review the assumptions and methods used by the
Trustees to make projections of the financial status of the trust funds. The members of the Panel began their
deliberations in November 2010 and were asked to focus their immediate attention on the long-range Medicare
cost growth assumptions. In December 2011, the panel members unanimously recommended a new approach that
builds on the longstanding “GDP plus 1 percent” assumption while incorporating several key refinements. Both the
Office of the Actuary at CMS and the Board of Trustees support these recommendations, and they form the basis




Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 115
                                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



for the long-range cost growth assumptions used in this annual report. The methodology is explained in more
detail in section IV.D of the 2013 Medicare Trustees Report:

         The Panel also recommended the continued use of a supplemental analysis, similar to the illustrative
         alternative projection in the 2010 through 2012 Trustees Reports, for the purpose of illustrating the
         higher Medicare costs that would result if the reduction in physician payment rates and the productivity
         adjustments to most other provider payment updates are not fully implemented as required under
                      4
         current law.

The SOSI projections must be based on current law. Therefore, the productivity adjustments are assumed to occur
in all future years, as required by the Affordable Care Act. In addition, an approximate 25 percent reduction in
Medicare payment rates for physician services in January 2014, as estimated in the 2013 Trustees Report, is
assumed to be implemented as required under current law, despite the virtual certainty that Congress will
continue to override this reduction. Therefore, it is important to note that the actual future costs for Medicare are
likely to exceed those shown by these current-law projections.

Illustrative Scenario
The Medicare Board of Trustees, in their annual report to Congress, references an alternative scenario to illustrate,
when possible, the potential understatement of Medicare costs and projection results. This alternative scenario
assumes that the productivity adjustments are gradually phased down during 2020 to 2034 and that the physician
fee reductions are overridden. These examples were developed for illustrative purposes only; the calculations have
not been audited; no endorsement of the illustrative alternative to current law by the Trustees, CMS, or the Office
of the Actuary should be inferred; and the examples do not attempt to portray likely or recommended future
outcomes. Thus, the illustrations are useful only as general indicators of the substantial impacts that could result
from future legislation affecting the productivity adjustments and physician payments under Medicare and of the
broad range of uncertainty associated with such impacts. The table on the next page contains a comparison of the
Medicare 75-year present values of income and expenditures under current law with those under the alternative
scenario illustration.




4
The Panel’s final report is available at http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/2013/MedicareTech/TechnicalPanelReport2010-2011.pdf.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 116
                                                                                                                                              FINANCIAL SECTION



                                                          Medicare Present Values
                                                                         (in Billions)

                                                                           Current law               Alternative scenario1, 2
                                                                           (Unaudited)                    (Unaudited)
                          Income
                            Part A                                                $ 16,192                                   $ 16,214
                            Part B                                                  21,377                                     27,510
                            Part D                                                   9,211                                      9,224
                          Expenditures
                            Part A                                                   20,963                                    25,396
                            Part B                                                   21,377                                    27,510
                            Part D                                                    9,211                                     9,224
                          Income less expenditures
                            Part A                                                  (4,772)                                    (9,182)
                            Part B                                                        0                                          0
                            Part D                                                        0                                          0
                          1These  amounts are not presented in the 2013 Trustees Report.
                          2Atthe request of the Trustees, the Office of the Actuary at CMS has prepared an illustrative set of Medicare
                          Trust Fund projections that differs from current law. No endorsement of the illustrative alternative to current
                          law by the Trustees, CMS, or the Office of the Actuary should be inferred.


As expected, the differences between the current-law projections and the illustrative alternative are substantial,
although both represent a sizable improvement in the financial outlook for Medicare compared to the laws in
effect prior to the Affordable Care Act. This difference in outlook serves as a compelling reminder of the
importance of developing and implementing further means of reducing health care cost growth in the coming
years. All Part A fee-for-service providers are affected by the productivity adjustments, so the current law
projections reflect an estimated 1.1 percent reduction in annual Part A cost growth each year. If the productivity
adjustments were gradually phased out, as illustrated under the alternative scenario, the present value of Part A
expenditures is estimated to be roughly 20 percent higher than the current-law projection. As indicated above, the
present value of Part A income is basically unaffected under the alternative scenario.

The Part B expenditure projections are significantly higher under the alternative scenario than under current law,
both because of the assumed gradual phase-out of the productivity adjustments and the assumption that the
scheduled physician fee reductions would be overridden and based on 0.7 percent annual increases through 2022,
based on a recommendation by the 2010-2011 Medicare Technical Review Panel. The productivity adjustments are
assumed to affect more than half of Part B expenditures at the time their phase-out is assumed to begin. Similarly,
physician fee schedule services are assumed to be roughly 25 percent higher under the alternative scenario than
under current law at that time. The combined effect of these two factors results in a present value of Part B
expenditures under the alternative scenario that is approximately 29 percent higher than the current-law
projection.

The Part D projections are basically unaffected under the alternative projection because the services are not
impacted by the productivity adjustments or the physician fee schedule reductions. The very minor impact is the
result of a slight change in the discount rates that are used to calculate the present values.
The extent to which actual future Part A and Part B costs exceed the projected current-law amounts due to
changes to the productivity adjustments and physician payments depends on both the specific changes that might
be legislated and on whether Congress would pass further provisions to help offset such costs. As noted, these
examples only reflect hypothetical changes to provider payment rates.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                       FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 117
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



It is likely that in the coming years Congress will consider, and pass, numerous other legislative proposals affecting
Medicare. Many of these will likely be designed to reduce costs in an effort to make the program more affordable.
In practice, it is not possible to anticipate what actions Congress might take, either in the near term or over longer
periods.

Note 24. Statement of Changes in Social Insurance Amounts (Unaudited)

The Statement of Changes in Social Insurance Amounts (SCSIA) reconciles the change (between the current
valuation and the prior valuation) in the (1) present value of future income (excluding interest) for current and
future participants; (2) present value of future expenditures for current and future participants; (3) present value
of future noninterest income less future expenditures for current and future participants (the open-group
measure) over the next 75 years; (4) assets of the combined Medicare Trust Funds; and (5) present value of future
noninterest income less future expenditures for current and future participants over the next 75 years plus the
assets of the combined Medicare Trust Funds. The Statement of Changes shows the reconciliation from the period
beginning on January 1, 2012 to the period beginning on January 1, 2013, and the reconciliation from the period
beginning on January 1, 2011 to the period beginning on January 1, 2012. The reconciliation identifies several
components of the change that are significant and provides reasons for the changes.

Because of the financing mechanism for Parts B and D of Medicare, any change to the estimated expenditures has
the same effect on estimated total income, and vice versa. Therefore, any change has no impact on the future net
cashflow. In order to enhance the presentation, the changes in the present values of income and expenditures are
presented separately.

The five changes considered in the Statement of Changes in Social Insurance Amounts are, in order:

  1.   change in the valuation period,
  2.   change in the projection base,
  3.   changes in demographic assumptions,
  4.   changes in economic and health care assumptions, and
  5.   changes in law

All estimates in the Statement of Changes in Social Insurance Amounts represent values that are incremental to
the prior change. As an example, the present values shown for demographic assumptions, represent the additional
effect that these assumptions have, once the effects from the change in the valuation period and projection base
have been considered.

Assumptions Used for the Statement of Changes in Social Insurance Amounts
The present values included in the Statement of Changes in Social Insurance Amounts are for the current and prior
year and are based on various economic and demographic assumptions used for the intermediate assumptions in
the Trustees Reports for those years. Table 1 of Note 22 summarizes these assumptions for the current year.

Period beginning on January 1, 2012 and ending January 1, 2013
Present values as of January 1, 2012 are calculated using interest rates from the intermediate assumptions of the
2012 Trustees Report. All other present values in this part of the Statement are calculated as a present value as of
January 1, 2013. Estimates of the present value of changes in social insurance amounts due to changing the
valuation period, projection base, demographic assumptions, and law are determined using the interest rates
under the intermediate assumptions of the 2012 Trustees Report. Since interest rates are economic assumptions,




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 118
                                                                                                     FINANCIAL SECTION



the estimates of the present values of changes in economic assumptions are presented using the interest rates
under the intermediate assumptions of the 2013 Trustees Report.

Period beginning on January 1, 2011 and ending January 1, 2012
Present values as of January 1, 2011 are calculated using interest rates from the intermediate assumptions of the
2011 Trustees Report. All other present values in this part of the Statement are calculated as a present value as of
January 1, 2012. Estimates of the present value of changes in social insurance amounts due to changing the
valuation period, projection base, demographic assumptions, and law are determined using the interest rates
under the intermediate assumptions of the 2011 Trustees Report. Since interest rates are economic assumptions,
the estimates of the present values of changes in economic assumptions are presented using the interest rates
under the intermediate assumptions of the 2012 Trustees Report.

Change in the Valuation Period

Period beginning on January 1, 2012 and ending January 1, 2013
The effect on the 75-year present values of changing the valuation period from the prior valuation period (2012-
86) to the current valuation period (2013-87) is measured by using the assumptions for the prior valuation period
and applying them, in the absence of any other changes, to the current valuation period. Changing the valuation
period removes a small negative net cashflow for 2012 and replaces it with a much larger negative net cashflow for
2087. The present value of future net cashflow (including or excluding the combined Medicare Trust Fund assets at
the start of the period) was therefore decreased (made more negative) when the 75-year valuation period
changed from 2012-86 to 2013-87. In addition, the effect on the level of assets in the combined Medicare Trust
Funds of changing the valuation period is measured by assuming all values projected in the prior valuation for the
year 2012 are realized. The change in valuation period decreased the level of assets in the combined Medicare
Trust Funds.

Period beginning on January 1, 2011 and ending January 1, 2012
The effect on the 75-year present values of changing the valuation period from the prior valuation period (2011-
85) to the current valuation period (2012-86) is measured by using the assumptions for the prior valuation period
and applying them, in the absence of any other changes, to the current valuation period. Changing the valuation
period removes a small negative net cashflow for 2011 and replaces it with a much larger negative net cashflow for
2086. The present value of future net cashflow (including or excluding the combined Medicare Trust Fund assets at
the start of the period) was therefore decreased (made more negative) when the 75-year valuation period
changed from 2011-85 to 2012-86. In addition, the effect on the level of assets in the combined Medicare Trust
Funds of changing the valuation period is measured by assuming all values projected in the prior valuation for the
year 2011 are realized. The change in valuation period decreased the level of assets in the combined Medicare
Trust Funds.

Change in the Projection Base

Period beginning on January 1, 2012 and ending January 1, 2013
Actual income and expenditures in 2012 were different than what was anticipated when the 2012 Trustees Report
projections were prepared. Part A income and expenditures were lower than anticipated, based on actual
experience. Part B total income and expenditures were also lower than estimated based on actual experience. For
Part D, actual income and expenditures were both slightly lower than prior estimates. The net impact of the Part A,
B, and D projection base changes is an increase in the future net cashflow. Actual experience of the Medicare Trust
Funds between January 1, 2012 and January 1, 2013 is incorporated in the current valuation and is slightly more
than projected in the prior valuation.



Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 119
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



Period beginning on January 1, 2011 and ending January 1, 2012
Actual income and expenditures in 2011 were different than what was anticipated when the 2011 Trustees Report
projections were prepared. Part A income was slightly higher than estimated and Part A expenditures were lower
than anticipated, based on actual experience. Part B total income and expenditures were higher than estimated
based on actual experience. For Part D, actual income and expenditures were both slightly lower than prior
estimates. The net impact of the Part A, B, and D projection base changes is an increase in the future net cashflow.
Actual experience of the Medicare Trust Funds between January 1, 2011 and January 1, 2012 is incorporated in the
current valuation and is slightly more than projected in the prior valuation.

Changes in Demographic Assumptions

Period beginning on January 1, 2012 and ending January 1, 2013
The demographic assumptions used in the Medicare projections are the same as those used for the Old-Age,
Survivors and Disability Insurance (OASDI) and are prepared by the Office of the Chief Actuary at the Social Security
Administration (SSA).

For the current valuation (beginning on January 1, 2013), changes in ultimate assumptions and recent data for
immigration have significant effects.

  •    The assumed ultimate annual immigration of “other immigrants”, that is, those entering the country
       without legal permanent resident (LPR) status, is 1.4 million in the current valuation, compared with 1.5
       million assumed for the prior valuation.

  •    The assumed ultimate annual number of persons attaining LPR status is 1.05 million for the current
       valuation, compared with 1.03 million assumed for the prior valuation. The distribution of the ultimate
       number between those entering the country with LPR status and those adjusting status after having already
       entered the country was also revised.

Otherwise, the ultimate demographic assumptions for the current valuation are the same as those for the prior
valuation. However, the starting demographic values, and the way these values transition to the ultimate
assumptions, were changed.

  •    Final mortality data for 2008 and 2009 show substantially larger reductions in death rates for the current
       valuation than were expected in the prior valuation. The new data show a lower starting level of death rates
       and a faster rate of decline in death rates over the next 25 years.
  •    Final fertility (birth) data for 2009 and 2010, and preliminary data for 2011, indicate lower birth rates for
       these years than were assumed in the prior valuation.
  •    New historical data for marital status, for the number of new marriages, for “other immigration”, and for
       the size of the population (based on the 2010 Census) were used in the current valuation.
These changes increased the Part A present values of future expenditures and income. Since overall population
projections are higher compared to the prior valuation, these changes increase the Part B and Part D present
values of expenditures, and also income because of the financing mechanism in place for both.

Period beginning on January 1, 2011 and ending January 1, 2012
The demographic assumptions used in the Medicare projections are the same as those used for the Old-Age,
Survivors and Disability Insurance (OASDI) and are prepared by the Office of the Chief Actuary at the Social Security
Administration (SSA).

The ultimate demographic assumptions for the current valuation period are the same as those for the prior
valuation period. However, the starting demographic values were changed.



Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 120
                                                                                                       FINANCIAL SECTION



  •    Preliminary birth rate data for 2009 and 2010 are lower than were expected in the prior valuation. During
       the period of transition to their ultimate values, the birth rates in the current valuation are generally lower
       than they were in the prior valuation.
  •    The current valuation incorporates final data on legal immigration levels for 2010. The levels are slightly
       lower than the estimates used in the prior valuation.
  •    Updated starting population levels and the interaction of these levels with the changes in the fertility and
       immigration assumptions result in higher ratios of retirement age population to working age population
       than in the prior valuation.

These changes have little impact on the Part A present values of future expenditures and income. However, since
overall population projections are lower compared to the prior valuation, these changes lower the Part B and Part
D present values of expenditures, and also income because of the financing mechanism in place for both.

Changes in Economic and Health Care Assumptions

Period beginning on January 1, 2012 and ending January 1, 2013
The economic assumptions used in the Medicare projections are the same as those used for the Old-Age, Survivors
and Disability Insurance (OASDI) and are prepared by the Office of the Chief Actuary at the Social Security
Administration (SSA).

The ultimate economic assumptions for the current valuation (beginning on January 1, 2013) are the same as those
for the prior valuation. Other changes include:

  •    The real interest rate is projected to be lower over the first ten years of the current valuation.
  •    The starting economic values and near-term economic growth rate assumptions were updated.

The health care assumptions are specific to the Medicare projections. The following health care assumptions were
changed in the current valuation.

  •    Utilization rate and case mix increase assumptions for skilled nursing facilities were decreased.
  •    Lower projected Medicare Advantage program costs that reflect recent data suggesting that certain
       provisions of the Affordable Care Act will reduce growth in these costs by more than was previously
       projected.
  •    Administrative action that increased Medicare Advantage payment rates beginning in 2014 to reflect
       assumed future legislative overrides of the physician payment reductions.
  •    Larger than previously projected impact from patent expiration of several major prescription drugs in 2012.
  •    Lower projected prescription drug trend for 2013.

The net impact of these changes resulted in a slight increase in the future net cashflow for total Medicare. For Part
A, these changes resulted in a decrease to the present value of expenditures and income, with an overall slight
increase in the future net cashflow. For Part B, these changes increased the present value of expenditures (and
also income). On the other hand, the above-mentioned changes lowered the present value of expenditures (and
also income) for Part D.

Period beginning on January 1, 2011 and ending January 1, 2012
The economic assumptions used in the Medicare projections are the same as those used for the Old-Age, Survivors
and Disability Insurance (OASDI) and are prepared by the Office of the Chief Actuary at the Social Security
Administration (SSA).




Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 121
                                                                                                       FINANCIAL SECTION



The ultimate economic assumptions for the current valuation period are the same as those for the prior valuation
period. However, the starting economic values and near-term economic growth rate assumptions were changed.
The economic recovery has been slower than was assumed for the prior valuation period.

  •    For the current valuation period, HI taxable earnings are considerably lower for the starting year, 2011, than
       were projected for the prior valuation period. The projected level of taxable earnings grows more slowly
       through 2017 for the current valuation period.
  •    Price inflation in 2011 was higher than expected, with the cost-of-living adjustment in December 2011 being
       2.9 percentage points higher than was assumed in the prior valuation.
  •    The real interest rate is projected to be lower over the first ten years of the current valuation period.

Inclusion of each of these economic revisions decreases the present value of future net cashflow.

The health care assumptions are specific to the Medicare projections. The following health care assumptions were
changed in the current valuation.

  •    Case mix growth assumptions for inpatient hospitals were lowered.
  •    Utilization rate and case mix increase assumptions for skilled nursing facilities and home health agencies
       were increased.
  •    Growth in hospice services was increased.
  •    Increase in average pre- Affordable Care Act “baseline” growth rate from GDP+1% to GDP+1.4% to better
       account for the level of payment rate updates for Medicare (prior to the Affordable Care Act) compared to
       private health insurance and other payers of health insurance in the U.S.
  •    Use of the “factors contributing to growth” model, developed by the Office of the Actuary at CMS, for year-
       by-year growth rate assumptions in long range. The impact of this change, in association with the baseline
       growth rate assumption described just above, has the biggest effect on the change in the net present value
       of income less expenditures. It resulted in an increase in the present value of Part A and Part B expenditures
       of roughly $1 trillion and $570 billion, respectively. Since the present value of Part A income is unaffected by
       these changes and the present value of Part B income is also higher by $570 billion, the net present value of
       income less expenditures is lower by about $1 trillion. Therefore, approximately $1 trillion of the $2.3
       trillion is due to these changes.
  •    Lower assumed growth rate for prescription drug expenditures in the U.S. overall.
  •    Explicit projection of Part B services indexed by the CPI (e.g., ASC, lab, and DME services). The impact of this
       change lowers the present value of Part B expenditures and income by roughly $570 billion, and has no
       effect on the net present value of income over expenditures.

The net impact of these changes resulted in a decrease in the future net cashflow for total Medicare. For Part A,
these changes resulted in an increase to the present value of expenditures and a very slight decrease on the
present value of income, with an overall decrease in the future net cashflow. For Part B, these changes increased
the present value of expenditures (and also income). On the other hand, the above-mentioned changes lowered
the present value of expenditures (and also income) for Part D.

Changes in Law

Period beginning on January 1, 2012 and ending January 1, 2013
Although Medicare legislation was enacted since the prior valuation date, many of the provisions have a negligible
impact on the present value of the 75-year income, expenditures, and net cashflow. The American Taxpayer Relief
Act of 2012 included several provisions that had an impact on the Medicare program. These include the extension



Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 122
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



of the zero percent physician payment update through 2013, which slightly increases the present value of Part B
expenditures; payments for inpatient hospital services in 2014-2017 are reduced in order to recoup $11 billion in
overpayments associated with documentation and coding adjustments during 2008-2010 that were not previously
recovered, which lowers the present value of Part A expenditures; reductions to the end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) bundled payment rate to reflect changes in the utilization of certain drugs and biological and a delay in the
inclusion of oral-only ESRD drugs in the rate, which reduces the present value of Part B expenditures and increases
the present value of Part D expenditures; and the coding intensity adjustment used in determining payments to
Medicare Advantage plans was revised, which lowers the present value of Part A and Part B expenditures.

Period beginning on January 1, 2011 and ending January 1, 2012
Although Medicare legislation was enacted since the prior valuation date, many of the provisions have a negligible
impact on the present value of the 75-year income, expenditures, and net cashflow. However, there were three
specific provisions enacted that had a fairly substantial impact on the Medicare program. These include the 2
percent sequestration of expenditures in February 2013 through January 2022 required by the Budget Control Act
of 2011, which reduces the present value of expenditures for Medicare; the extension of the 0 percent physician
payment update through 2012 required by the Temporary Payroll Tax Cut Continuation Act of 2011 and the Middle
Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, which slightly increases the present value of Part B expenditures; and
the reduction in bad debt payments required by the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, which
reduces the present value of Part A and Part B expenditures.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 123
                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL SECTION



Note 25. Reconciliation of Net Cost of Operations (Proprietary) to Budget (in Millions)



                                                                                                                         2013                   2012
Resources Used to Finance Activities:
Budgetary Resources Obligated
        Obligations Incurred                                                                                    $     1,282,036      $       1,205,880
        Spending Authority from Offsetting Collections and Recoveries                                                  (49,640)               (47,415)
        Obligations Net of Offsetting Collections and Recoveries                                                      1,232,396              1,158,465
        Distributed Offsetting Receipts                                                                               (336,655)              (317,777)
        Net Obligations                                                                                         $      895,741       $        840,688


Other Resources
     Net Non-Budgetary Resources Used to Finance Activities                                                                 58                     21
Total Resources Used to Finance Activities                                                                      $      895,799       $        840,709


Resources Used to Finance Items Not Part of the Net Cost of Operations:
     Change in Budgetary Resources Obligated for Goods, Services and Benefits Ordered but Not Yet Provided      $       (3,623)      $        (13,909)
     Resources That Fund Expenses Recognized in Prior Periods                                                               54                    138
     Budgetary Offsetting Collections and Receipts That Do Not Affect Net Cost of Operations                            (1,202)                (1,255)
     Resources That Finance the Acquisition of Assets or Liquidations of Liabilities                                     1,314                  1,652
     Other Resources or Adjustments to Net Obligated Resources That Do Not Affect Net Cost of Operations                 7,089                  1,995
Total Resources Used to Finance Items Not Part of the Net Cost of Operations                                             3,632                (11,379)
Total Resources Used to Finance the Net Cost of Operations                                                       $     892,167           $    852,088


Components of Net Cost of Operations That Will Not Require or Generate Resources in the Current Period
     Components Requiring or Generating Resources in Future Periods                                              $       2,495           $      2,870
     Components Not Requiring or Generating Resources                                                                    1,588                    589
Total Components of Net Cost of Operations That Will Not Require or Generate Resources in the Current Period             4,083                  3,459
Net Cost of Operations                                                                                           $     896,250           $    855,547




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 124
                                                                                                              FINANCIAL SECTION




                 REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY STEWARDSHIP INFORMATION

Investment in Human Capital (in Millions)

For the Year Ended September 30, 2013


  Responsibility Segment Program                                         2013        2012        2011        2010         2009
    Administration for Children and Families
    Administration for Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities   $      6    $      6    $     11    $      9     $     10
    Health Resources and Services Administration
    Scholarships Loan Repayments and Loans                                766         705         761         691          447
    National Institutes of Health
     Research Training and Career Development                            1,621       1,858       1,920       1,915        1,862

  Totals                                                             $ 2,393     $ 2,569     $ 2,692     $ 2,615      $ 2,319




Investments in Human Capital are expenses incurred by federal education and training programs for the public,
which are intended to maintain or increase national productive capacity. Three HHS OPDIVs conduct education and
training programs under this category: ACF, NIH and HRSA.

Administration for Children and Families
Projects of National Significance (PNS) grants are awarded to public or private non-profit institutions to enhance
the independence, productivity, integration and inclusion into the community of people with developmental
disabilities. These monies also support the development of national and state policy to serve this community.
While administered by the Administration for Community Living as part of a 2012 reorganization, funding for this
and other Administration for Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AIDD) programs continues to be provided
first to ACF and then transferred to ACL. ACF is able to estimate Investment in Human Capital for AIDD using
existing data collection activities. Under AIDD, as of September 30, 2013, 20 PNS grants have been awarded for FY
2013. Grants awarded total $6 million as of September 30, 2013.

Health Resources and Services Administration
Under Clinician Recruitment and Service, the National Health Service Corps (NHSC) is a network of 8,900 primary
care providers and 14,000 sites working in communities with limited access to health care across the country. To
support their service, the NHSC provides clinicians with financial support in the form of loan repayment and
scholarships. In addition, the Nursing Education Loan Repayment and Scholarship programs help alleviate the
critical shortage of nurses by providing financial incentives in exchange for their service at Critical Shortage
Facilities.

The Health Professions Training programs make grants to health professions schools and training programs, which
use the funds to develop, expand and enhance their efforts to train the health workforce America needs. They
include programs focused on increasing diversity, encouraging clinicians to practice in underserved areas and
preparing health care providers equipped to meet the needs of the aging U.S. population. Primary care medicine
and dentistry, nursing, public health, psychology, allied health and chiropractic training programs benefit from
specific grant programs. The Bureau of Health Professions (BHPr) also administers a scholarship for disadvantaged
students and student loan programs for health professions schools.



Department of Health and Human Services                                                      FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 125
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION



National Institutes of Health
The NIH Research Training Program and Career Development Program address the need for trained personnel to
conduct medical research. The primary goal of the support that NIH provides for graduate training and career
development is to produce new, highly trained investigators who are likely to perform research that will benefit
the nation’s health. NIH’s ability to maintain the momentum of recent scientific progress and international
leadership in medical research depends upon the continued development of new, highly trained investigators.




Investment in Research and Development (in Millions)

As of September 30, 2013

Responsibility                               Develop-        2013                                                               Grand
Segments             Basic      Applied        mental        Total        2012         2011            2010         2009        Total
ACF              $       -    $       1    $        -   $       1    $       2    $       7    $          9    $      16    $           35
AHRQ                      -         342           30          372          401          333             263          203
                                                                                                                                   1,572
CDC                                 298           28          457          408          457             465          755
                       131                                                                                                         2,542
FDA                                    -           6           94           80           58              48           36            316
                        88
NIH                                                 -
                     17,597       11,731                    29,328       30,681       32,902         31,342        27,889        152,142
Totals           $ 17,816     $   12,372   $      64    $   30,252   $   31,572   $   33,757   $     32,127    $   28,899   $ 156,607



The research and development programs in HHS include the following:

Administration for Children and Families
ACF oversees research and development programs that contribute to a better understanding of how to improve
the economic and social well-being of families and children, so that they may lead healthier and more productive
lives.

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
AHRQ is the lead federal agency charged with improving the quality, safety, efficiency and effectiveness of health
care for all Americans. AHRQ supports health services research that will improve the quality of health care and
promote evidence-based decision making.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Diseases, Occupational Safety and Health, Health Promotion and Environmental Health and Injury Prevention were
the primary areas where CDC’s research and development was invested.

Food and Drug Administration
FDA has two programs that meet the requirements of research and development investments: Orphan Products
Development (OPD) Program and FDA Research Grants Program. While the FDA’s center components conduct
scientific studies, FDA does not consider this type of research as “research and development” because it is used to
support FDA’s regulatory policy and decision-making processes.

The OPD Program was established by the Orphan Drug Act with the purpose of identifying orphan products and
facilitating their development. An orphan product is a drug, biological product, medical device or medical food




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 126
                                                                                                    FINANCIAL SECTION



that is intended to treat a rare disease or condition (i.e., one with a prevalence of fewer than 200,000 people in
the United States).

The FDA Research Grants Program is a grants program whose purpose is to assist public and non-public
institutions and for-profit organizations to establish, expand and improve research, demonstration, education and
information dissemination activities concerned with a wide variety of FDA areas.

National Institutes of Health
The NIH Research Program includes all aspects of the medical research continuum, including basic and disease-
oriented research, observational and population-based research, behavioral research and clinical research,
including research to understand both health and disease states, to move laboratory findings into medical
applications, to assess new treatments or compare different treatment approaches; and health services research.
NIH regards the expeditious transfer of the results of its medical research for further development and
commercialization of products of immediate benefit to improved health as an important mandate.




Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 127
                                                                                                                                          FINANCIAL SECTION




                                       REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Combining Statement of Budgetary Resources (in Millions)

As of September 30, 2013
                                                                                                    CMS
                                                                                                                                                                      Non-
                                                                                                                                                                   Budgetary
                                                                                                                                   Other                             Credit
                                                                                                                                  Agency           Agency            Reform
                                                                                                Medicare                         Budgetary       Combined          Financing
Budgetary Resources:                                                           Medicare HI        SMI            Medicaid        Accounts 5        Totals           Account
Unobligated Balance, Brought Forward, Oct 1                                    $          -     $        -       $ 21,090        $ 59,690        $    80,780       $     3,175
Recoveries of Prior Year Unpaid Obligations                                              141               97          18,132           6,228            24,598              -
Other Changes in Unobligated Balance                                                     (54)              20               9          (1,196)           (1,221)           (1)
Unobligated Balance from Prior Year Budget Authority, Net                                 87              117          39,231          64,722           104,157          3,174
Appropriations (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                         276,583         252,305          245,836         419,009         1,193,733              -
Borrowing Authority (Discretionary and Mandatory)                                           -                -               -               -                 -       (2,064)
Spending Authority from Offsetting Collections (Discretionary and Mandatory)             439               11             528          24,431            25,409          (685)
Total Budgetary Resources                                                      $     277,109    $    252,433     $    285,595    $    508,162    $ 1,323,299       $      425


Status of Budgetary Resources:
Obligations Incurred                                                           $     277,109    $    252,433     $    283,313    $    468,867    $ 1,281,722       $      314
Unobligated Balances, End of Year:
    Apportioned                                                                             -                -          2,282          27,711            29,993            40
    Exempt from Apportionment                                                               -                -               -          2,059             2,059              -
    Unapportioned                                                                           -                -               -          9,525             9,525            71
Total Unobligated Balance, End of Year                                                      -                -          2,282          39,295            41,577           111
Total Status of Budgetary Resources                                            $     277,109    $    252,433     $    285,595    $    508,162    $ 1,323,299       $      425


Change in Obligated Balance:
Unpaid Obligation:
Unpaid Obligations, Brought Forward, Oct 1                                      $     24,209    $     24,404     $     26,837    $    105,304    $      180,754    $     1,602
Obligation Incurred                                                                  277,109         252,433          283,313         468,867         1,281,722           314
Outlays (Gross)                                                                     (276,074)       (252,049)        (262,141)       (459,066)       (1,249,330)         (668)
Actual Transfers, unpaid obligations (net)                                                  -                -               -            106               106              -
Recoveries of Prior Year Unpaid Obligations                                             (141)             (97)        (18,132)         (6,228)         (24,598)              -
Unpaid Obligations, End of Year                                                $      25,103    $     24,691     $     29,877    $    108,983    $      188,654    $     1,248


Uncollected Payments:
Uncollected Customer Payments from Federal Sources, Brought Forward, Oct 1     $          (1)   $            -   $           -   $    (10,102)   $     (10,103)    $   (1,587)
Change in Uncollected Customer Payments from Federal Sources                               1                 -               -           (916)            (915)          1,051
Uncollected Payments from Federal Sources, End of Year                         $            -   $            -   $           -   $    (11,018)   $     (11,018)    $     (536)

Memorandum (non-add) Entries:
Obligated Balance, Start of Year                                               $      24,208    $     24,404     $     26,837    $     95,202    $      170,651    $       15
Obligated Balance, End of Year                                                 $      25,103    $     24,691     $     29,877    $     97,965    $      177,636    $      712




5
  "Other Agency Budgetary Accounts" includes the budgetary accounts of the 11 HHS responsibility segments other than CMS, as well as the
remaining budgetary accounts not reported by CMS under Medicare and Medicaid. This includes budgetary resources of $3.6 billion and net
outlays of $3.8 billion for the Vaccine for Children Program which are appropriated to the Medicaid program and transferred to the CDC.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 128
                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL SECTION



Combining Statement of Budgetary Resources (Continued) (in Millions)


                                                                                  CMS
                                                                                                                                              Non-
                                                                                                                                           Budgetary
                                                                                                                 Other                       Credit
                                                                                                                Agency        Agency        Reform
                                                                              Medicare                         Budgetary     Combined      Financing
                                                              Medicare HI       SMI            Medicaid        Accounts 6     Totals        Account
Budget Authority and Outlays, Net:
Budget Authority, Gross (Discretionary and Mandatory)         $ 277,022       $ 252,316        $ 246,364       $ 443,440     $ 1,219,142   $   (2,749)
Actual Offsetting Collections (Discretionary and Mandatory)          (440)             (11)           (528)       (23,833)      (24,812)        (366)
Change in Uncollected Customer Payments from Federal
                                                                         1                -               -          (916)         (915)        1,051
Sources (Discretionary and Mandatory)
Budget Authority, Net (Discretionary and Mandatory)           $ 276,583       $ 252,305        $ 245,836       $ 418,691     $ 1,193,415   $   (2,064)


Outlays, Gross (Discretionary and Mandatory)                  $ 276,074       $ 252,049        $ 262,141       $ 459,066     $ 1,249,330   $      668
Actual Offsetting Collections (Discretionary and Mandatory)          (440)             (11)           (528)       (23,833)      (24,812)        (366)
Outlays, Net (Discretionary and Mandatory)                         275,634         252,038          261,613       435,233     1,224,518           302
Distributed Offsetting Receipts                                    (29,435)       (306,366)               -          (854)     (336,655)               -
Agency Outlays, Net (Discretionary and Mandatory)             $ 246,199       $ (54,328)       $ 261,613       $ 434,379     $ 887,863     $      302




                                             Summary of Other Agency Budgetary Accounts

                                                                                Status of
                                                               Budgetary       Budgetary
                                                               Resources       Resources        Net Outlays
                                               ACF             $    51,744    $       51,744    $     49,606
                                               ACL                   1,445            1,445            1,440
                                               AHRQ                    416              416             319
                                               CDC                  10,905            10,905          10,388
                                               CMS                 378,532           378,532         319,897
                                               FDA                   4,941            4,941            1,576
                                               HRSA                  9,066            9,066            8,644
                                               IHS                   6,469            6,469            4,272
                                               NIH                  33,799            33,799          31,104
                                               OS                    5,695            5,695            3,446
                                               PSC                   1,603            1,603             461
                                               SAMHSA                3,547            3,547            3,226
                                               Totals          $ 508,162      $      508,162    $ 434,379




6
  "Other Agency Budgetary Accounts" includes the budgetary accounts of the 11 HHS responsibility segments other than CMS, as well as the
remaining budgetary accounts not reported by CMS under Medicare and Medicaid. This includes budgetary resources of $3.6 billion and net
outlays of $3.8 billion for the Vaccine for Children Program which are appropriated to the Medicaid program and transferred to the CDC.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 129
                                                                                                           FINANCIAL SECTION



Deferred Maintenance and Repairs

For the Years Ended September 30, 2013 and 2012

FASAB issued SFFAS Number 40, Definitional changes to Deferred Maintenance; Amending SFFAS Number 6,
Accounting for Property, Plant, and Equipment, effective for periods after September 30, 2011. This standard
clarifies that repair activities should be included to better reflect asset management practices, and improve
reporting on deferred maintenance and repairs. Deferred maintenance and repairs are maintenance and repairs
activities not performed when they should have been or were scheduled to be, and then were put off or delayed
for a future period. Maintenance and repairs are the activities directed toward keeping fixed assets in acceptable
condition, including preventive maintenance, normal repairs, replacement of parts and structural components and
other activities needed to preserve the asset so that it continues to provide acceptable service and achieves its
expected life. Maintenance and repairs do not include activities aimed at expanding the capacity of an asset or
otherwise upgrading it to serve needs different from, or significantly greater than, those originally intended.
Maintenance and repair expenses are recognized as incurred. CDC, NIH and FDA all use the condition assessment
survey for all classes of property. IHS uses two types of surveys to assess installations – annual general inspections
and deep look surveys.


                                                                     Estimated Cost to Return to
                                                                        Acceptable Condition

                         Category of Asset
                            (in Millions)        Condition                  2013                   2012
                            General PP&E
                    Buildings                       1-4          $           2,249   $             2,038
                    Equipment                       3-4                        12                    14
                    Other Structures                1-4                        13                    30
                    Total                                        $           2,274   $             2,082



In a condition assessment survey, asset condition is assessed on a scale of 1-5 as follows: Excellent-1; Good-2; Fair-
3; Poor-4; Very Poor-5. A “fair” or 3 rating is considered acceptable operating condition. Although Property, Plant
and Equipment categories may be rated as acceptable, individual assets within a category may require
maintenance work to return them to acceptable operating condition. Therefore, asset categories with an overall
rating of “fair” or above may still report necessary costs to return them to acceptable condition.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 130
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



Stewardship Property, Plant and Equipment

As of September 30, 2013

HHS has Indian Trust Lands that are considered a type of property, plant and equipment for stewardship reporting
purposes. Indian Trust Lands are those lands that do not meet the definition of stewardship land (i.e., land other
than those acquired for or used in connection with general Property, Plant and Equipment), but have always been
held by IHS as separate and distinct, because of the government’s long-term trust responsibility. All Trust Lands,
when no longer needed by the IHS in connection with its general use Property, Plant and Equipment, must be
returned to the Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs for continuing Trust responsibilities and
oversight.

For the purpose of SFFAS Number 29, Heritage Assets and Stewardship Land, heritage assets are any real property
assets that are individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places. As of September 30, 2013, IHS has no
individually listed properties.

The IHS accountability reports differentiate Indian Trust Land parcels from general Property, Plant and Equipment
situated thereon. The IHS Trust Land balances are removed from HHS FY 2013 Consolidated Balance Sheet and
reported as Stewardship Assets - Indian Trust Lands.

The table below provides a summary of the Distribution of Stewardship Assets by Type and Area, as of September
30, 2013.

                                Distribution of Stewardship Assets by Type and Area


                                                         Indian Trust Lands
                                              Number of Sites             Total Hectares
                        Aberdeen                     9                           75
                        Albuquerque                  4                            3
                        Bemidji                      2                            9
                        Billings                     7                           48
                        Navajo                      35                          255
                        Oklahoma City                1                            2
                        Phoenix                     12                           14
                        Portland                     3                            1
                        Tucson                       5                           12
                        Total                       78                          419




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 131
                                                                                                     FINANCIAL SECTION



Social Insurance

Medicare, the largest health insurance program in the country, has helped fund medical care for the nation’s aged
and disabled for almost five decades. A brief description of the provisions of Medicare’s Hospital Insurance (HI, or
Part A) Trust Fund and Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI, or Parts B and D) Trust Fund is included in this
financial report.

The Required Supplementary Information (RSI) contained in this section is based on current law and is presented in
accordance with the requirements of the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB). Included are
descriptions of the long-term sustainability and financial condition of the program and a discussion of trends
revealed in the data.

RSI material is generally drawn from the 2013 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital
Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds, which represents the official government
evaluation of the financial and actuarial status of the Medicare Trust Funds. Unless otherwise noted, all data are
for calendar years, and all projections are based on the Trustees’ intermediate set of assumptions.

The projections in this report incorporate the sequestration of non-salary Medicare expenditures as required by
the Budget Control Act of 2011 (Public Law 112-25, enacted on August 2, 2011), as amended by the American
Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012. Under the sequestration, Medicare benefit payments are reduced by an estimated 2
percent and administration expenses are reduced by an estimated 5 percent. The reduction in benefit payments
will end on March 31, 2022, and the administrative expense reductions will end on September 30, 2021.

The projections shown here also incorporate the effects of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as
amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010. This legislation, referred to collectively as
the “Affordable Care Act,” contained roughly 165 provisions affecting the Medicare program by reducing costs,
increasing revenues, improving benefits, combating fraud and abuse, and initiating a major program of research
and development to identify alternative provider payment mechanisms, health care delivery systems, and other
changes intended to improve the quality of health care and reduce costs.

The financial projections for the Medicare program reflect substantial, but very uncertain, cost savings deriving
from provisions of the Affordable Care Act. These improved results for HI and SMI Part B depend in part on the
long-range feasibility of the various cost-saving measures in the Affordable Care Act —in particular, the lower
increases in Medicare payment rates to most categories of health care providers. It is possible that providers can
improve their productivity, reduce wasteful expenditures, and take other steps to keep their cost growth within
the bounds imposed by the Medicare price limitations. Whether these provisions of current law can be sustained is
debatable due to substantial uncertainty about the adequacy of future Medicare payment rates. Without
fundamental changes in current health care delivery systems, these adjustments would probably not be viable
indefinitely. For these reasons, the estimates shown under current law should be used cautiously in evaluating the
overall financial obligation created by Medicare and in assessing the financial status of the individual trust fund
accounts. However, the effects of some of the law’s provisions on Medicare are not known at this time, with the
result that the projections are very uncertain, especially in the longer-range future.

As stated previously, the projections in this section are drawn from the annual Medicare Trustees Report, which
must be based on current law. In addition, the FASAB rules governing the Statement of Social Insurance also
require use of projections based on current law. Accordingly, the permanent payment update reductions are
assumed to occur in all future years, as required by the Affordable Care Act. In addition, a reduction in Medicare
payment rates for physician services of almost 25 percent is assumed to be implemented beginning in 2014 as



Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 132
                                                                                                                       FINANCIAL SECTION



required under current law, despite the virtual certainty that Congress will override the reduction, as they have
every year since 2003.

As will be discussed in more detail later, the long-range Medicare cost growth assumptions under current law take
into consideration the recommendations by the 2010-2011 Technical Review Panel on the Medicare Trustees
Report. These recommendations were designed to build upon the long-range assumptions used in the 2011 and
prior Trustees Reports, but they incorporated a more refined analysis of the factors behind those assumptions,
most notably for the increases in the price, volume, and intensity of health care services overall.

In view of the factors described above, it is important to note that the actual future costs for Medicare are likely to
exceed those shown by the current-law projections. Therefore, the Medicare Board of Trustees, in their annual
report to Congress, reference two alternative scenarios to illustrate where possible the potential understatement
of Medicare costs and projection results. At the request of the Trustees, the Office of the Actuary at CMS has
prepared an illustrative set of Medicare Trust Fund projections under hypothetical modifications to current law. No
endorsement of the illustrative alternatives by the Trustees, CMS, or the Office of the Actuary should be inferred.
Additional information on the hypothetical alternatives to current law is provided in Note 23 in these financial
statements, in Appendix C of this years’ annual Medicare Trustees Report, and in an auxiliary memorandum
prepared by the CMS Office of the Actuary at the request of the Board of Trustees.

Printed copies of the Trustees Report and auxiliary memorandum may be obtained from the CMS Office of the
Actuary (410-786-6386) or can be downloaded from http://www.cms.hhs.gov/ReportsTrustFunds/.


Actuarial Projections

Long-Range Medicare Cost Growth Assumptions
The assumed long-range rate of growth in annual Medicare expenditures per beneficiary is one of the most critical
determinants of the projected cost of Medicare-covered health care services in the more distant future. Starting
with the 2001 Medicare Trustees Report, the assumed average increase in expenditures per beneficiary for the
25th through 75th years of the projection has been based in whole or in part on the growth in per capita GDP plus
1 percentage point. 7 This assumption was recommended by the 2000 Medicare Technical Review Panel and
confirmed as reasonable by the 2004 panel. Beginning with the 2006 report, the Trustees adopted a slight
refinement of the long-range growth assumption that provided a more gradual transition from current health cost
growth rates, which had been roughly 2 to 3 percentage points above the level of GDP growth, to the ultimate
assumed level of GDP plus zero percent just after the 75th year and for the indefinite future. 8

Following enactment of the Affordable Care Act, the long-range Medicare cost growth assumptions for the 2010
and 2011 Medicare Trustees Reports continued to use this same methodology to establish a pre- Affordable Care
Act “baseline” set of annual growth rates. The Trustees then reduced these growth rates for most categories of




7
    This assumed increase in the expenditures per beneficiary excludes the impacts of the aging of the population and changes in the gender
    composition of the Medicare population, which are estimated and applied separately.
8
    The year-by-year growth assumptions were based on a simplified economic model and were determined in a way such that the 75-year
    actuarial balance for the HI Trust Fund was consistent with that generated by the constant “GDP plus 1 percent” assumption.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 133
                                                                                                                           FINANCIAL SECTION



Medicare expenditures by the 10-year moving average increase in private, non-farm business multifactor
productivity, as required under the Affordable Care Act. 9

In December 2011, the 2010-2011 Medicare Technical Review Panel 10 unanimously recommended a new approach
that builds on the longstanding “GDP plus 1 percent” assumption while incorporating several key refinements. 11
The methodology involves use of two separate means of establishing long-range growth rates. The first approach is
a refinement to the traditional “GDP plus 1 percent” growth assumption, which better accounts for the magnitude
of payment rate updates for Medicare (prior to the Affordable Care Act) compared to private health insurance and
other payers of health care. Under this approach, the rate of growth in Medicare prices prior to the provisions of
the Affordable Care Act, which was assumed to be the same as the rate of private medical price growth in earlier
reports, is now assumed to be 0.4 percent faster. This change results in the long-range pre- Affordable Care Act
“baseline” cost growth assumption being “GDP plus 1.4 percent.” The second approach recommended by the
Technical Panel is the “factors contributing to growth” model developed by the Office of the Actuary at CMS as a
possible replacement for the existing process.

The Technical Panel did not specify a process for how to establish one set of growth rate assumptions from the
two separate and independent techniques. For the 2012 report, the Trustees decided (i) to base the average
ultimate growth rate on the updated “GDP plus 1.4 percent” baseline assumption and (ii) to use the “factors
contributing to growth” model to create the specific, year-by-year declining growth rates during the last 50 years
of the projection.

For the 2013 Medicare Trustees Report, the Trustees decided to use the factors model as the basis for determining
the long-range Medicare cost growth assumption and to apply the “GDP plus” framework as a reasonableness
check. The long-range Medicare cost growth assumptions under current law are established in three steps. Based
on the factors model, the Trustees (i) create specific, year-by-year declining national health expenditure (NHE)
growth rates over the long-range period and derive the growth in the volume and intensity of NHE services;
(ii) assume, consistent with Finding III-2 of the Technical Panel’s report, that the growth in the volume and
intensity of Medicare services prior to the effects of the Affordable Care Act is identical to the growth in the
volume and intensity of overall NHE services; and (iii) determine the Medicare payment rate updates required by
the Affordable Care Act and their estimated effects on increases in the volume and intensity of services. For
Medicare services for which the Affordable Care Act permanently reduces the annual increases in Medicare
payment rates by the increase in economy-wide productivity, the Trustees adjust the growth rates in the volume
and intensity of services by −0.1 percent annually. This assumption is consistent with Recommendation III-3 of the
Technical Panel’s report.




9
“Multifactor productivity” is a measure of real output per combined unit of labor and capital, reflecting the contributions of all factors of
 production.
10
    The Panel’s final report is available at http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/2013/MedicareTech/TechnicalPanelReport2010-2011.pdf.
11
     For convenience, the assumed increase in Medicare expenditures per beneficiary, before consideration of demographic effects, is referred to
    as the “Medicare cost growth” and is often expressed in relation to the per capita increase in GDP, with the result characterized simply as
    “GDP plus X percent.”




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                   FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 134
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



The different provisions for updating payment rates require separate long-range cost growth assumptions for the
different categories of providers:

    1.   All HI, and some SMI Part B (primarily outpatient hospital, home health, and dialysis), services that are
         updated annually by provider input price increases, less the increase in economy-wide productivity, have
         on average an ultimate growth rate of 4.3 percent or “GDP plus 0.2 percent.” The year-by-year increases
         for these provider services start at 4.5 percent in 2037, or “GDP plus 0.4 percent,” and gradually decline
         to 3.6 percent in 2087, or “GDP minus 0.5 percent.”

    2.   Certain SMI Part B services—such as durable medical equipment, laboratory tests, care at ambulatory
         surgical centers, ambulance services, and medical supplies that are updated annually by the Consumer
         Price Index (CPI) increase, less the increase in productivity—have on average a long-range growth
         assumption of 3.5 percent or “GDP minus 0.6 percent.” The corresponding year-by-year growth rates are
         3.6 percent in 2037, or “GDP minus 0.5 percent,” declining to 2.8 percent in 2087, or “GDP minus
         1.3 percent.”

    3.   Per beneficiary expenditures for services payable under the physician fee schedule are increased at
         approximately the rate of per capita GDP growth, as required by the sustainable growth rate formula in
         current law.

    4.   All other Part B outlays, which constitute an estimated 11.0 percent of total Part B expenditures in 2022,
         have on average a long-range per beneficiary cost growth rate of 5.1 percent, or “GDP plus 1 percent.”
         The corresponding year-by-year growth rates from the factors model are 5.3 percent in 2037, or “GDP
         plus 1.2 percent,” declining to 4.4 percent by 2087, or “GDP plus 0.3 percent.”

After combining the rates of growth from the four long-range assumptions, the weighted average growth rate for
Part B is 4.1 percent per year for the last 50 years of the projection period, or “GDP plus 0 percent,” on average.
When Parts A, B, and D are combined, the weighted average growth rate for Medicare is 4.3 percent over this
same period.

HI Cashflow as a Percentage of Taxable Payroll
Each year, estimates of the financial and actuarial status of the HI Trust Fund are prepared for the next 75 years. It
is difficult to meaningfully compare dollar values for different periods without some type of relative scale;
therefore income and expenditure amounts are shown relative to the earnings in covered employment that are
taxable under HI (referred to as “taxable payroll”).

Chart 1 illustrates income (excluding interest) and expenditures as a percentage of taxable payroll over the next
75 years. The projected long-range HI cost rates shown in this report are lower than those from the 2012 report.
The primary reasons for the difference are (i) lower projected spending for most HI service categories—especially
for skilled nursing facilities—to reflect lower-than-expected spending in 2012 and other recent data; (ii) lower
projected Medicare Advantage program costs that reflect recent data suggesting that certain provisions of the
Affordable Care Act will reduce growth in these costs by more than was previously projected; and (iii) a refinement
in projection methods that reduces assumed per beneficiary cost growth during the transition period between the
short-range projections and the long-range projections.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 135
                                                                                                              FINANCIAL SECTION




                         Chart 1—HI Expenditures and Income Excluding Interest
                                    as a Percentage of Taxable Payroll
                                               2013 - 2087
              8%



                                                                           Expenditures
              6%




              4%
                                                                               Income excluding interest



              2%




              0%
                2007        2017          2027   2037       2047        2057         2067       2077       2087
                                                        Calendar year                             Source: CMS/OACT


Since the standard HI payroll tax rates are not scheduled to change in the future under present law, most payroll
tax income as a percentage of taxable payroll is estimated to remain constant at 2.90 percent. Under the
Affordable Care Act, however, high-income workers will pay an additional 0.9 percent of their earnings above
$200,000 (for single workers) or $250,000 (for married couples filing joint income tax returns) in 2013 and later.
Because these income thresholds are not indexed, over time an increasing proportion of workers will become
subject to the additional HI tax rate, and consequently total HI payroll tax revenues will increase steadily as a
percentage of taxable payroll. Income from taxation of benefits will also increase as a greater proportion of Social
Security beneficiaries become subject to such taxation, since the income thresholds determining taxable benefits
are not indexed for price inflation. Thus, as Chart 1 shows, the income rate is expected to gradually increase over
current levels.

As indicated in Chart 1, the cost rate will initially decline due to the expected economic recovery, the savings
provisions of the Affordable Care Act, and the 2 percent reduction in all Medicare expenditures for 2013-2022, as
required by the Budget Control Act of 2011 and amended by the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012.
Subsequently, the cost rate will increase significantly due to retirements of those in the baby boom generation and
continuing health services cost growth. The effect of these factors will be largely offset in 2045 and later under
current law by the accumulating effect of the reduction in provider price updates, which will reduce annual HI cost
growth by an estimated 1.1 percent per year. Under the alternative scenario, if the slower price updates were not
feasible in the long range and were phased down during 2020-2034, then the HI cost rate would be 5.2 percent in
2035 and 9.2 percent in 2085. These levels are about 8 percent and 57 percent higher, respectively, than the
current-law estimates under the intermediate assumptions.

HI and SMI Cashflow as a Percentage of GDP
Expressing Medicare incurred expenditures as a percentage of GDP gives a relative measure of the size of the
Medicare program compared to the general economy. The GDP represents the total value of goods and services
produced in the United States. This measure provides an idea of the relative financial resources that will be
necessary to pay for Medicare services.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                       FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 136
                                                                                                                              FINANCIAL SECTION



HI
Chart 2 shows HI income (excluding interest) and expenditures over the next 75 years expressed as a percentage of
GDP. In 2012, the expenditures were $266.8 billion, which was 1.7 percent of GDP. This percentage is projected to
increase steadily through 2046 and then remain fairly level throughout the rest of the 75-year period, as the
accumulated effects of the price update reductions are realized. Based on the illustrative alternative projections, 12
HI costs as a percentage of GDP would increase steadily throughout the long-range projection period, reaching
4.0 percent in 2087.




                                   Chart 2—HI Expenditures and Income Excluding Interest
                                                 as a Percentage of GDP
                                                       2013 - 2087
                   4.0%




                   3.0%                                                                   Expenditures




                   2.0%


                                                                                     Income Excluding Interest
                   1.0%




                   0.0%
                       2007         2017         2027        2037         2047        2057         2067        2077         2087

                                                                    Calendar year                              Source: CMS/OACT




12
     At the request of the Trustees, the Office of the Actuary at CMS has prepared an illustrative set of Medicare Trust Fund projections under
     hypothetical alternatives to current law, which assumes that (i) the SGR-mandated physician fee schedule payment reductions are replaced
     with a 0.7-percent annual increase during 2014-2022 and then gradually rise to the per capita increase in health spending in the US overall by
     2037; (ii) the Affordable Care Act reductions in Medicare payment rates are partially phased out from 2020-2034; and (iii) the Independent
     Payment Advisory Board requirements are not implemented. A summary of the illustrative alternative projections is contained in appendix
     V.C. of the 2013 Trustees Report. No endorsement of the illustrative alternatives to current law by the Trustees, CMS, or the Office of the
     Actuary should be inferred.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                      FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 137
                                                                                                          FINANCIAL SECTION



SMI
Because of the Part B and Part D financing mechanism in which income mirrors expenditures, it is not necessary to
test for long-range imbalances between income and expenditures. Rather, it is more important to examine the
projected rise in expenditures and the implications for beneficiary premiums and Federal general revenue
payments.

Chart 3 shows projected total SMI (Part B and Part D) expenditures and premium income as a percentage of GDP.
The growth rates are estimated year by year for the next 10 years, reflecting the impact of specific statutory
provisions. Expenditure growth for years 11 to 25 is assumed to grade smoothly into the long-range assumption
described previously.

Under the intermediate assumptions, annual SMI expenditures were $307.4 billion, or about 2.0 percent of GDP, in
2012. Then, in about 25 years, they would grow to roughly 3.4 percent of GDP and to 4.0 percent by the end of the
projection period. Total SMI expenditures in 2087 would be 4.7 percent of GDP if physician payment rates were set
as assumed under the illustrative alternative projections. Such costs would represent 5.7 percent of GDP under the
full illustration, including larger payment updates for most other categories of Part B providers.



                     Chart 3—SMI Expenditures and Premiums as a Percentage of GDP
                                              2013 - 2087
                5.0%

                                                       Total
                                                    expenditures
                4.0%

                                                                                              Part D
                                                                                           expenditures
                3.0%



                2.0%

                                                       Total                                  Part B
                                                     premiums                              expenditures
                1.0%
                                                                                     D

                                                                                     B
                0.0%
                    2010     2020     2030   2040   2050    2060     2070   2080   2090    2100      2110

                                                     Calendar year                        Source: CMS/OACT




To match the faster growth rates for SMI expenditures under current law, beneficiary premiums, along with
general revenue contributions, would increase more rapidly than GDP over time. In fact, average per-beneficiary
costs for Part B and Part D benefits are projected to increase after 2013 by about 4.4 percent annually. The
associated beneficiary premiums—and general revenue financing—would increase by approximately the same
rate. The special State payments to the Part D account are set by law at a declining portion of the States’ forgone
Medicaid expenditures attributable to the Medicare drug benefit. The percentage was 90 percent in 2006, phasing
down to 75 percent in 2015 and later. Then, after 2015, the State payments are also expected to increase faster
than GDP.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 138
                                                                                                       FINANCIAL SECTION



Worker-to-Beneficiary Ratio

HI
Another way to evaluate the long-range outlook of the HI Trust Fund is to examine the projected number of
workers per HI beneficiary. Chart 4 illustrates this ratio over the next 75 years. For the most part, current benefits
are paid for by current workers. The retirement of the baby boom generation will therefore be financed by the
relatively smaller number of persons born after the baby boom. In 2012, every beneficiary had 3.3 workers to pay
for his or her benefit. In 2030, however, after the last baby boomer turns 65, there will be only about 2.3 workers
per beneficiary. The projected ratio continues to decline until there are just 2.1 workers per beneficiary by 2087.




                              Chart 4—Number of Covered Workers per HI Beneficiary
                                                  2013 - 2087
                    5.0



                    4.0



                    3.0



                    2.0



                    1.0



                    0.0
                       2007     2017      2027   2037      2047     2057     2067     2077      2087
                                                        Calendar year
                                                                                         Source: CMS/OACT



Sensitivity Analysis
In order to make projections regarding the future financial status of the HI and SMI Trust Funds, various
assumptions have to be made. First and foremost, the estimates presented here are based on the assumption that
both trust funds will continue under present law. In addition, the estimates depend on many economic and
demographic assumptions. Because of revisions to these assumptions, due to either changed conditions or
updated information, estimates sometimes change substantially compared to those made in prior years.
Furthermore, it is important to recognize that actual conditions are very likely to differ from the projections
presented here, since the future cannot be anticipated with certainty.




Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 139
                                                                                                                                       FINANCIAL SECTION



To illustrate the sensitivity of the long-range projections and determine the impact on the HI actuarial present
values, six of the key assumptions were varied individually. 13 The assumptions varied are the health care cost
factors, real-wage differential, CPI, real-interest rate, fertility rate, and net immigration. 14

For this analysis, the intermediate economic and demographic assumptions in the 2013 Annual Report of the
Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds are
used as the reference point. Each selected assumption is varied individually to produce three scenarios. All present
values are calculated as of January 1, 2013 and are based on estimates of income and expenditures during the
75-year projection period.

Charts 5 through 10 show the present value of the estimated net cashflow for each assumption varied. Generally,
under all three scenarios, the present values initially increase, as the effects of the Affordable Care Act result in
trust fund surpluses, and then decrease until about 2045 when they start to increase (or become less negative)
once again. This pattern occurs in part because of the discounting process used for computing present values,
which is used to help interpret the net cashflow deficit in terms of today’s dollar. In other words, the amount
required to cover this deficit, if made available and invested today, begins to decrease at the end of the 75-year
period, reflecting the long period of interest accumulation that would occur. The pattern is also affected by the
accumulating impact of the lower Medicare price updates over time and the greater proportion of workers who
will be subject to the higher HI payroll tax rate, as noted above.


Health Care Cost Factors
Table 1 shows the net present value of cashflow during the 75-year projection period under three alternative
assumptions for the annual growth rate in the aggregate cost of providing covered health care services to
beneficiaries. These assumptions are that the ultimate annual growth rate in such costs, relative to taxable payroll,
will be 1 percent slower than the intermediate assumptions, the same as the intermediate assumptions, and
1 percent faster than the intermediate assumptions. In each case, the taxable payroll will be the same as that
which was assumed for the intermediate assumptions.

                         Table 1—Present Value of Estimated HI Income Less Expenditures under
                                  Various Health Care Cost Growth Rate Assumptions

                                                                              −1 percentage               Intermediate                +1 percentage
Annual cost/payroll relative growth rate                                          point                   assumptions                     point

Income minus expenditures (in billions)                                            $1,242                    $(4,772)                    $(14,352)




13
      Sensitivity analysis is not done for Parts B or D of the SMI Trust Fund due to the financing mechanism for each account. Any change in
     assumptions would have a negligible impact on the net cashflow, since the change would affect income and expenditures equally.
14
      The sensitivity of the projected HI net cash flow to variations in future mortality rates is also of interest. At this time, however, relatively little
     is known about the relationship between improvements in life expectancy and the associated changes in health status and per beneficiary
     health expenditures. As a result, it is not possible at present to prepare meaningful estimates of the HI mortality sensitivity.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 140
                                                                                                                        FINANCIAL SECTION



Table 1 demonstrates that if the ultimate growth rate assumption is 1 percentage point lower than the
intermediate assumptions, the deficit decreases by $6,014 billion. On the other hand, if the ultimate growth rate
assumption is 1 percentage point higher than the intermediate assumptions, the deficit increases substantially, by
$9,580 billion.

Chart 5 shows projections of the present value of the estimated net cashflow under the three alternative annual
growth rate assumptions presented in Table 1.


                                         Chart 5—Present Value of HI Net Cashflow
                                           with Various Health Care Cost Factors
                                                        2013 - 2087
                                                                  (In billions)
                     $100



                       $0                                                                       -1 percentage point




                    -$100
                                                                                                  Intermediate
                                                                                                  assumptions


                    -$200

                                                                                                +1 percentage point

                    -$300
                         2007        2017       2027       2037         2047       2057       2067       2077         2087
                                                                   Calendar year
                                                                                                          Source: CMS/OACT



This assumption has a dramatic impact on projected HI cashflow. The present value of the net cashflow under the
ultimate growth rate assumption of 1 percentage point lower than the intermediate assumption actually becomes
a surplus and remains positive throughout the entire period, due to the improved financial outlook for the HI Trust
Fund as a result of the Affordable Care Act. Several factors, such as the utilization of services by beneficiaries or the
relative complexity of services provided, can affect costs without affecting tax income. As Chart 5 indicates, the
financial status of the HI Trust Fund is extremely sensitive to the relative growth rates for health care service costs.

Real-Wage Differential
Table 2 shows the net present value of cashflow during the 75-year projection period under three alternative
ultimate real-wage differential assumptions: 0.5, 1.1, and 1.7 percentage points. 15 In each case, the assumed
ultimate annual increase in the CPI is 2.8 percent, yielding ultimate percentage increases in nominal average
annual wages in covered employment of 3.3, 3.9, and 4.5 percent, respectively.




15
     The real-wage differential is the difference between the percentage increases in the average annual wage in covered employment and the
     average annual CPI.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 141
                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL SECTION



                   Table 2—Present Value of Estimated HI Income Less Expenditures under
                                     Various Real-Wage Assumptions

Ultimate percentage increase in wages − CPI                                        3.3 − 2.8          3.9 − 2.8         4.5 − 2.8

Ultimate percentage increase in real-wage differential                               0.5                  1.1              1.7

Income minus expenditures (in billions)                                            $(5,310)           $(4,772)          $(3,753)

As indicated in Table 2, for a half-point increase in the ultimate real-wage differential assumption, the deficit—
expressed in present-value dollars—decreases by approximately $850 billion. Conversely, for a half-point decrease
in the ultimate real-wage differential assumption, the deficit increases by about $450 billion.

Chart 6 shows projections of the present value of the estimated net cashflow under the three alternative
real-wage differential assumptions presented in Table 2.


                                      Chart 6—Present Value of HI Net Cashflow
                                        with Various Real-Wage Assumptions
                                                     2013 - 2087
                                                        (In billions)
                $20

                  $0
                                                                                      Ultimate annual increase in:
                -$20                                                                         Wages: 4.5%
                                                                                             CPI:    2.8%
                                                    Ultimate annual increase in:
                -$40                                       Wages: 3.9%
                                                           CPI:    2.8%
                -$60

                -$80
                                                                                      Ultimate annual increase in:
              -$100                                                                          Wages: 3.3%
                                                                                             CPI:    2.8%

              -$120
                   2007        2017       2027   2037        2047         2057        2067         2077         2087
                                                        Calendar year
                                                                                                  Source: CMS/OACT



As illustrated in Chart 6, faster real-wage growth results in smaller HI cashflow deficits, when expressed in present-
value dollars. A higher real-wage differential immediately increases both HI expenditures for health care and
wages for all workers. There is a full effect on wages and payroll taxes, but the effect on benefits is only partial,
since not all health care costs are wage-related. In practice, faster real-wage growth always improves the financial
status of the HI Trust Fund, regardless of whether there is a small or large imbalance between income and
expenditures. Also, as noted previously, the closer financial balance for the HI Trust Fund under the Affordable
Care Act depends critically on the long-range feasibility of the lower Medicare price updates for hospitals and
other HI providers. There is a strong likelihood that certain of these changes will not be viable in the long range.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 142
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION



Consumer Price Index
Table 3 shows the net present value of cashflow during the 75-year projection period under three alternative
ultimate CPI rate-of-increase assumptions: 1.8, 2.8, and 3.8 percent. In each case, the assumed ultimate real-wage
differential is 1.1 percent, which yields ultimate percentage increases in average annual wages in covered
employment of 2.9, 3.9, and 4.9 percent, respectively.

                                 Table 3—Present Value of Estimated HI Income
                           Less Expenditures under Various CPI-Increase Assumptions


Ultimate percentage increase in wages − CPI                                2.9 − 1.8           3.9 − 2.8                 4.9 − 3.8

Income minus expenditures (in billions)                                    $(4,976)            $(4,772)                  $(4,548)

Table 3 demonstrates that if the ultimate CPI-increase assumption is 1.8 percent, the deficit increases by
$204 billion. On the other hand, if the ultimate CPI-increase assumption is 3.8 percent, the deficit decreases by
$224 billion.

Chart 7 shows projections of the present value of net cashflow under the three alternative CPI rate-of-increase
assumptions presented in Table 3.

                                      Chart 7—Present Value of HI Net Cashflow
                                       with Various CPI-Increase Assumptions
                                                     2013 - 2087
                                                         (In billions)
                $20

                 $0

               -$20                                                               Ultimate annual increase in:
                                                                                        Wages: 4.9%
                                                                                        CPI:      3.8%
               -$40
                                                 Ultimate annual increase in:
                                                       Wages: 3.9%
               -$60                                    CPI:      2.8%

               -$80

                                                                                   Ultimate annual increase in:
              -$100                                                                      Wages: 2.9%
                                                                                         CPI:      1.8%
              -$120
                   2007       2017        2027   2037        2047         2057         2067       2077            2087
                                                        Calendar year
                                                                                                Source: CMS/OACT


As Chart 7 indicates, this assumption has a small impact when the cashflow is expressed as present values. The
relative insensitivity of the projected present values of HI cashflow to different levels of general inflation occurs
because inflation tends to affect both income and costs in a similar manner. In present value terms, a smaller
deficit results under high-inflation conditions because the present values of HI expenditures are not significantly
different under the various CPI scenarios, but under high-inflation conditions the present value of HI income
increases as more people become subject to the additional 0.9-percent HI tax rate required by the Affordable Care
Act for workers with earnings above $200,000 or $250,000 (for single and joint income-tax filers, respectively).
Since the thresholds are not indexed, additional workers become subject to the additional tax more quickly under
conditions of faster inflation, and vice versa.


Department of Health and Human Services                                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 143
                                                                                                          FINANCIAL SECTION




Real-Interest Rate
Table 4 shows the net present value of cashflow during the 75-year projection period under three alternative
ultimate annual real-interest assumptions: 2.4, 2.9, and 3.4 percent. In each case, the assumed ultimate annual
increase in the CPI is 2.8 percent, which results in ultimate annual yields of 5.2, 5.7, and 6.2 percent, respectively.

                                  Table 4—Present Value of Estimated HI Income
                            Less Expenditures under Various Real-Interest Assumptions

Ultimate real-interest rate                                     2.4 percent       2.9 percent               3.4 percent

Income minus expenditures (in billions)                           $(5,800)             $(4,772)                $(3,954)

As illustrated in Table 4, for every increase of 0.1 percentage point in the ultimate real-interest rate, the deficit
decreases by approximately $185 billion.

Chart 8 shows projections of the present value of the estimated net cashflow under the three alternative
real-interest assumptions presented in Table 4.

                                      Chart 8—Present Value of HI Net Cashflow
                                     with Various Real-Interest Rate Assumptions
                                                     2013 - 2087
                                                         (In billions)
                  $20

                    $0

                  -$20                                           I: 3.4%
                                                                 II: 2.9%
                                                                 III: 2.4%
                  -$40
                                                                                                   I
                  -$60
                                                                                                   II
                  -$80
                                                                                                  III
                -$100

                -$120
                     2007       2017      2027    2037       2047        2057   2067       2077         2087

                                                      Calendar year                      Source: CMS/OACT


As shown in Chart 8, the projected HI cashflow when expressed in present values is fairly sensitive to the interest
assumption. This is not an indication of the actual role that interest plays in HI financing. In actuality, interest
finances very little of the cost of the HI Trust Fund because, under the intermediate assumptions, the fund is
projected to be relatively low and exhausted by 2026. These results illustrate the substantial sensitivity of present
value measures to different interest rate assumptions. With higher assumed interest, the very large deficits in the
more distant future are discounted more heavily (that is, are given less weight), resulting in a smaller overall net
present value.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 144
                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL SECTION



Fertility Rate
Table 5 shows the net present value of cashflow during the 75-year projection period under three alternative
ultimate fertility rate assumptions: 1.7, 2.0, and 2.3 children per woman.

                                      Table 5—Present Value of Estimated HI Income
                                Less Expenditures under Various Fertility Rate Assumptions

Ultimate fertility rate1                                                             1.7                    2.0                       2.3

Income minus expenditures (in billions)                                        $(5,159)                   $(4,772)                  $(4,378)
1
    The total fertility rate for any year is the average number of children who would be born to a woman in her lifetime if she were to experience
    the birth rates by age observed in, or assumed for, the selected year and if she were to survive the entire childbearing period.


As Table 5 demonstrates, for an increase of 0.3 in the assumed ultimate fertility rate, the projected present value
of the HI deficit decreases by approximately $390 billion.

Chart 9 shows projections of the present value of the net cashflow under the three alternative fertility rate
assumptions presented in Table 5.


                                         Chart 9—Present Value of HI Net Cashflow
                                      with Various Ultimate Fertility Rate Assumptions
                                                         2013 - 2087
                                                                     (In billions)
                        $20

                         $0

                       -$20
                                                                          I - 2.3 children per woman
                                                                         II - 2.0 children per woman
                       -$40                                             III - 1.7 children per woman
                                                                                                                        I
                       -$60
                                                                                                                        II

                       -$80                                                                                            III

                     -$100

                     -$120
                          2007         2017       2027        2037     2047     2057               2067       2077           2087
                                                                  Calendar year
                                                                                                               Source: CMS/OACT



As Chart 9 indicates, the fertility rate assumption has a substantial impact on projected HI cashflows. Under the
higher fertility rate assumptions, there will be additional workers in the labor force after 20 years, as in past
reports, but their impact on future HI taxes will be relatively greater, since many will become subject to the
additional HI tax, thereby lowering the deficit proportionately more on a present-value-dollar basis. Under the
lower fertility rate assumptions, on the other hand, there will be fewer workers in the workforce with a smaller
number subject to the additional tax, in turn raising the HI deficit. It is important to point out that if a longer
projection period were used, the impact of a fertility rate change would be more pronounced.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                      FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 145
                                                                                                                   FINANCIAL SECTION



Net Immigration
Table 6 shows the net present value of cashflow during the 75-year projection period under three alternative
average annual net immigration assumptions: 800,000 persons, 1,095,000 persons, and 1,400,000 persons per
year.

                                Table 6—Present Value of Estimated HI Income
                        Less Expenditures under Various Net Immigration Assumptions

Average annual net immigration                                                  800,000           1,095,000           1,400,000

Income minus expenditures (in billions)                                         $(4,848)          $(4,772)             $(4,731)



As indicated in Table 6, if the average annual net immigration assumption is 800,000 persons, the deficit—
expressed in present-value dollars—increases by $76 billion. Conversely, if the assumption is 1,400,000 persons,
the deficit decreases by $41 billion.

Chart 10 shows projections of the present value of net cashflow under the three alternative average annual net
immigration assumptions presented in Table 6.


                                      Chart 10—Present Value of HI Net Cashflow
                                      with Various Net Immigration Assumptions
                                                     2013 - 2087
                                                                (In billions)
                  $20

                   $0

                 -$20

                 -$40

                 -$60
                                                             1,400,000
                 -$80

                -$100                     1,095,000
                                                                     800,000

                -$120
                     2007      2017       2027        2037        2047          2057       2067     2077       2087
                                                             Calendar year
                                                                                                     Source: CMS/OACT



Higher net immigration results in smaller HI cashflow deficits, as illustrated in Chart 10. Since immigration tends to
occur most often among people at working ages, who work and pay taxes into the HI system, a change in the net
immigration assumption affects revenues from payroll taxes almost immediately. However, the impact on
expenditures occurs later as those individuals age and become beneficiaries.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 146
                                                                                                      FINANCIAL SECTION



Trust Fund Finances and Sustainability

HI
Under the Medicare Trustees’ intermediate assumptions, the estimated depletion date for the HI Trust Fund is
2026, 2 years later than in last year’s report. As in past years, the Trustees have determined that the fund is not
adequately financed over the next 10 years. HI taxable earnings in 2012 were slightly lower than last year’s
estimate. The projected rate of growth in these earnings is lower in 2013 and 2014 but then exceeds last year’s
growth assumptions after 2014. HI expenditures in 2012 were slightly lower than the previous estimate, but after
2014, the projected level grows more rapidly than shown in last year’s report because of assumed higher payment
updates. HI expenditures have exceeded income annually since 2008, and projected amounts continue doing so
through 2014. The Trustees then project slight surpluses in 2015 through 2020 with a return to deficits thereafter
until the fund becomes depleted in 2026. The shortfalls can be met with increasing reliance on the redemption of
trust fund assets, thereby adding to the draw on the Federal Budget. In the absence of corrective legislation, a
depleted HI Trust Fund would initially produce payment delays but would very quickly lead to a curtailment of
health care services to beneficiaries. In practice, Congress has never allowed a Medicare or Social Security Trust
Fund to become fully depleted.

It is important to note that the improved outlook for the HI Trust Fund, relative to pre- Affordable Care Act,
depends in part on the feasibility of the provider payment update reductions. There is a significant likelihood,
however, that these providers would not be able to reduce their cost growth rates sufficiently during this period to
match the slower increases in Medicare payments per service, and in this case they would eventually become
unable to continue providing health care services to Medicare beneficiaries. If such a situation occurred, and
Congress overrode the payment update reductions, then actual costs would be higher, and the HI Trust Fund
would be depleted somewhat sooner.

The HI Trust Fund remains out of financial balance in the long range. Bringing the fund into actuarial balance over
the next 75 years under the intermediate assumptions would require significant increases in revenues and/or
reductions in benefits. These changes are needed partially as a result of the retirement of the baby boom
generation. If the reductions to HI provider price updates could not be continued in the long run, then the actuarial
deficit would be much greater.

SMI
Under current law, the SMI Trust Fund will remain adequate, both in the near term and into the indefinite future,
because of the automatic financing established for Parts B and D. There is no authority to transfer assets between
the Part D and Part B accounts; therefore, it is necessary to evaluate each account’s financial adequacy separately.

The financing established for the Part B account for calendar year 2013 is adequate to cover 2013 expected
expenditures and to maintain the financial status of the account in 2013 at a satisfactory level. The Part B cost
projections are understated as a result of the substantial reductions in physician payments that would be required
under current law and are further understated if the reductions in future price updates for most other Part B
providers are not viable. Actual future Part B costs will depend on the steps that Congress might choose to take to
address these situations.

No financial imbalance is anticipated for the Part D account, since the general revenue subsidy for this benefit is
drawn on a daily, as-needed basis. The projected Part D costs shown in this section are lower than previously
estimated. The difference is primarily attributable to the further increase of the market penetration of generic
drugs, the larger than previously projected impact from patent expiration of several major drugs in 2012, and a
lower projected trend for 2013.


Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 147
                                                                                                                        FINANCIAL SECTION



The Part B and Part D accounts in the SMI Trust Fund are adequately financed under current law because premium
and general revenue income are reset each year to cover expected costs. Such financing, however, would have to
increase faster than the economy to cover expected expenditure growth under current law. A critical issue for the
SMI program is the impact of the rapid growth of SMI costs, which places steadily increasing demands on
beneficiaries and taxpayers.

Medicare Overall
The Medicare Modernization Act requires the Board of Trustees to determine whether the difference between
Medicare outlays and “dedicated financing sources” is projected to exceed 45 percent of total Medicare outlays
within the next 7 fiscal years (2013-2019). 16 This difference is expected to exceed 45 percent of total expenditures
in fiscal year 2013, which is the first year of the 7-year test period. Consequently, the Trustees issued a
determination of projected “excess general revenue Medicare funding,” as required by law. Similar determinations
were made in their 2006-2012 annual reports to Congress. With this eighth consecutive finding, another “Medicare
funding warning” is triggered this year, indicating that the general revenues provided to Medicare under current
law are becoming a substantial proportion of total program costs. This finding requires the President to submit to
Congress, within 15 days after the release of the next budget, proposed legislation to respond to the warning.
Congress is then required to consider this legislation on an expedited basis. This requirement helps to call
attention to Medicare’s impact on the Federal Budget. To date, elected officials have not enacted legislation
responding to these funding warnings.

The projections shown in this section continue to demonstrate the need for timely and effective action to address
the remaining financial challenges facing Medicare—including the projected depletion of the HI Trust Fund, this
fund’s long-range financial imbalance, and the issue of rapid growth in Medicare expenditures. Furthermore, if the
lower prices payable for health services under Medicare cannot be sustained, then these further policy reforms
will have to address much larger financial challenges than implied by the current-law projections. In their 2013
annual report to Congress, the Medicare Boards of Trustees emphasized the seriousness of these concerns and
urged the nation’s policy makers to “work closely together with a sense of urgency to address these challenges.”
They also stated: “Consideration of such reforms should occur in the near future.”




16
 Dedicated Medicare financing sources include HI payroll taxes; income from taxation of Social Security benefits; State transfers for the
 prescription drug benefit; premiums paid under Parts A, B, and D; fees allocated to Part B related to brand-name prescription drugs; and any
 gifts received by the Medicare Trust Funds.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 148
OTHER INFORMATION
                                          What Money is Available to Spend?                                                                                                                                                                                                               FY 2013
                                          Total Resources                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $    1,323,724
                                          Less: Amount Av ailable but Not Agreed to be Spent                                                                                                                                                                                                  32,092
                                          Less: Amount Not Av ailable to be Spent                                                                                                                                                                                                              9,596
                                          Total Amounts Agreed to be Spent                                                                                                                                                                                                            $    1,282,036

                                                                                                                Grants, Subsidies       Insurance Claims Other Contractual          Personnel         Supplies and       Personnel        Rent, Communications
                                          How was the Money Spent?                                          and Contributions           and Indemnities          Services         Compensation          Materials        Benefits             and Utilities             Other             FY 2013
                                            Medicaid                                                        $              283,398 $                 -       $               72 $                12 $         3,422 $                4 $                        10 $             2 $         286,920
                                            Medicare Hospital Insurance                                                             -            266,543                     38                   -                  -                -                          -         10,528            277,109
                                            Medicare Supplementary Medical Insurance                                                -            241,977                     44                   -                  -                -                          -         10,412            252,433
                                            Pay ments to Trust Funds                                                       246,922                       -                    -                   -                  -                -                          -              780          247,702
                                            Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit (Medicare Part D)                                    -             69,357                      -                   -                  -                -                          -              390           69,747
                                            Temporary Assistance for Needy Families                                         16,660                       -                   61                   1                  -                -                          -                -           16,722
                                            State Children’s Health Insurance Program                                        9,472                       -                   20                   -                  -                -                         33                -            9,525
                                            Children and Families Serv ices                                                  8,928                       -                  344                 118                 1                32                         17              10             9,450
                                            Foster Care and Adoption Assistance                                              6,489                       -                  145                   -                  -                -                          -                -            6,634
                                            Medicare Health Information Technology Incentiv e                                       -              6,059                      -                   -                  -                -                          -                -            6,059




Department of Health and Human Services
                                            Indian Health Serv ices                                                          2,494                       1                  823                 964             437              325                            39              99             5,182
                                            National Cancer Institute                                                        2,915                       -              1,345                   386                 32           106                            10              31             4,825
                                            Child Support Enforcement and Family Support                                     3,156                       -              1,121                     -                  -                -                          -                -            4,277
                                            Allergy and Infectious Diseases                                                  2,381                       -              1,504                   233                 39               66                          3              24             4,250
                                            Primary Health Care                                                              3,053                       -                  164                 53                  1                17                          8               2             3,298
                                            Low Income Home Energy Assistance                                                3,248                       -                    7                   -                  -                -                          -                -            3,255
                                            Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute                                                 2,266                       -                  501                 114                 17               32                          1              13             2,944
                                            Child Care Entitlement to States                                                 2,894                       -                   40                   -                  -                -                          -                -            2,934
                                            Mental Health                                                                    1,972                       -                  298                 75                  5                20                          2              11             2,383
                                            Affordable Insurance Ex change Grants                                            2,266                       -                   31                   4                  -                1                          5                -            2,307
                                            General Medical Sciences                                                         2,142                       -                  122                 21                   -               6                           -               1             2,292
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (in Millions)




                                            Public Health and Social Serv ices                                                291                        -              1,160                   100             604                  25                         23              36             2,239
                                            Ry an White HIV/AIDS Program                                                     2,132                       -                   81                  16                  -               5                           2               2             2,238
                                            Child Care and Dev elopment Block Grant                                          2,182                       -                   24                   -                  -                -                          -                -            2,206
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       As of September 30, 2013




                                            Social Serv ices Block Grant                                                     2,154                       -                   14                   1                  -                -                          -                -            2,169
                                            Substance Abuse Treatment                                                        1,937                       1                  171                  5                   -               1                           -               1             2,116
                                            Diabetes and Digestiv e and Kidney Diseases                                      1,478                       -                  229                 85                  13               23                          1               9             1,838
                                            Pre-ex isting Condition Insurance Plan                                                  -                    -              1,773                     1                  -                -                          2                -            1,776
                                            Health Care Fraud and Abuse                                                             -                    -              1,540                    36                  -               11                         10               1             1,598
                                            Neurological Disorders and Stroke                                                1,238                       -                  202                 63                  9                17                          1              12             1,542
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OTHER FINANCIAL INFORMATION




                                            Aging Serv ices Programs                                                         1,394                       -                   18                  13                  -               4                           3                -            1,432
                                            Serv ice and Supply Fund                                                                -                    -                  742                 194                 53               55                        276              22             1,342
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Combining Schedule of Spending by Object Class




                                            Disease Control Research and Training                                             373                        -                  473                 222                 83               70                         50              70             1,341
                                            Child Health and Human Dev elopment                                               865                        -                  292                 77                  9                21                          1               8             1,273
                                            Public Health Preparedness and Response                                           604                        -                  164                 78              371                  26                          2              11             1,256
                                            National Institute on Drug Abuse                                                  768                        -                  234                 50                  4                14                          1               5             1,076
                                            HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, Sex ually Transmitted Diseases and
                                                                                                                              732                        -                  137                 123                 4                43                          1               8             1,048
                                            Tuberculosis Prev ention
                                            National Institute on Aging                                                       822                        -                  146                 50                  9                13                          3               5             1,048
                                            Refugee and Entrant Assistance                                                    931                        -                   62                   4                  -                1                          2               1             1,001
                                            Other Agency Budgetary Accounts                                                 11,582                  868                12,757              4,332                363            1,446                           539          1,362             33,249
                                          Total Amounts Agreed to be Spent                                  $              630,139 $             584,806 $             26,899 $            7,431 $            5,476 $          2,384 $                        1,045 $      23,856 $        1,282,036
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      $    1,282,036




FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION




                                          Who did the Money go to?                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FY 2013
                                                Federal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30,608
                                                Non-Federal                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1,251,428
                                          Total Amounts Agreed to be Spent                                                                                                                                                                                                            $ 1,282,036
                                                                                                                                               OTHER INFORMATION




                                            Consolidating Balance Sheet by Budget Function
                                                                   As of September 30, 2013
                                                                          (in Millions)


                                                           Education,
                                                           Training &                                                    Agency                               HHS
                                                             Social                                       Income        Combined         Intra-HHS        Consolidated
                                                            Services        Health     Medicare          Security        Totals        Eliminations          Totals
Assets (Note 2)
Intragovernmental Assets
        Fund Balance with Treasury (Note 3)                 $   8,807   $ 129,513          $     9,448       $ 11,424   $ 159,192      $              -   $    159,192
        Investments, Net (Note 4)                                   -          5,550           276,173              -        281,723                  -        281,723
        Accounts Receivable, Net (Note 5)                          26          1,695            66,027             11         67,759           (64,110)          3,649
        Advances (Note 8)                                           1            39               113               -           153                (50)            103
Total Intragovernmental Assets                              $   8,834   $ 136,797          $ 351,761         $ 11,435   $ 508,827      $       (64,160)   $    444,667
Accounts Receivable, Net (Note 5)                                   -          3,714             7,216              3                                 -         10,933
                                                                                                                              10,933
Inventory and Related Property, Net (Note 6)                        -          8,602                 -              -                                 -          8,602
                                                                                                                               8,602
General Property, Plant and Equipment, Net (Note 7)                 -          5,056              308               -                                 -          5,364
                                                                                                                               5,364
Advances (Note 8)                                                   -            34                  -              -                                 -             34
                                                                                                                                 34
Other Assets                                                        -           655                  -              -           655                   -            655
Total Assets                                                $   8,834   $ 154,858      $ 359,285         $     11,438   $ 534,415      $       (64,160)   $    470,255


Stewardship Property, Plant and Equipment (Note 1)


Liabilities (Note 9)
Intragovernmental Liabilities
        Accounts Payable                                    $       5   $       124    $        64,410   $          -   $     64,539   $       (63,974)    $       565
        Other Liabilities (Note 13)                                31          1,263              900               1          2,195             (186)           2,009
Total Intragovernmental Liabilities                         $      36   $      1,387   $        65,310   $          1   $     66,734   $       (64,160)    $     2,574
        Accounts Payable                                           12           546               104               -           662                   -            662
        Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable (Note 10)              -         28,663            48,614              -         77,277                  -         77,277
        Accrued Grant Liability (Note 12)                         679          2,577              (17)            710          3,949                  -          3,949
        Federal Employee and Veterans Benefits (Note 11)            5         11,549               12               -         11,566                  -         11,566
        Contingencies and Commitments (Note 14)                     -          7,600             1,300              -          8,900                  -          8,900
        Other Liabilities (Note 13)                                19          1,301             1,248             13          2,581                  -          2,581
Total Liabilities                                           $     751   $     53,623   $ 116,571         $        724   $ 171,669       $      (64,160)    $   107,509
Net Position
  Unexpended Appropriations - Funds from dedicated
                                                                    -          (100)             4,569              -          4,469                  -          4,469
  collections (Note 21)
  Unexpended Appropriations - Other funds                       8,071         86,954                 -         10,703        105,728                  -        105,728
  Unexpended Appropriations, Total                          $   8,071   $     86,854   $         4,569   $     10,703   $ 110,197          $          -    $   110,197


  Cumulative Results of Operations - Funds from
                                                                    -          5,851           238,145              -        243,996                  -        243,996
  dedicated collections (Note 21)
  Cumulative Results of Operations - Other funds                   12          8,530                 -             11          8,553                  -          8,553
  Cumulative Results of Operations, Total                          12         14,381           238,145             11        252,549                  -        252,549
Total Net Position                                          $   8,083   $ 101,235      $ 242,714         $     10,714   $ 362,746          $          -    $   362,746
Total Liabilities and Net Position                          $   8,834   $ 154,858      $ 359,285         $     11,438   $ 534,415          $   (64,160)    $   470,255




Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                     FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 151
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Agency                            HHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Combined     Intra-HHS         Consolidated
                                                                                                                                  ACF          ACL           AHRQ         CDC           CMS         FDA          HRSA          IHS           NIH          OS          PSC        SAMHSA       Totals    Eliminations          Totals
                                          Assets (Note 2)
                                              Intragovernmental Assets
                                                  Fund Balance with Treasury (Note 3)                                         $    19,589 $          642 $      124 $      6,759 $       76,609 $     3,630 $      7,509 $       2,082 $      31,013 $     7,639 $          478 $   3,118 $   159,192               - $          159,192
                                                  Investments, Net (Note 4)                                                             -              -          -            -        278,270           -        3,428             -            25           -              -         -     281,723               -            281,723
                                                  Accounts Receivable, Net (Note 5)                                                    14             23         28           33          3,371          13           17            36            54         142            216         4       3,951            (302)             3,649
                                                  Advances (Note 8)                                                                     -              1          -            3            114           -           10             -             -           4              1        20         153             (50)               103
                                              Total Intragovernmental Assets                                                       19,603            666        152        6,795        358,364       3,643       10,964         2,118        31,092       7,785            695     3,142     445,019            (352)           444,667




Department of Health and Human Services
                                             Accounts Receivable, Net (Note 5)                                                          3              -          -             4        10,637         175            6           106             1           -              1         -      10,933               -             10,933
                                             Inventory and Related Property, Net (Note 6)                                               -              -          -         3,202             -           -            2             7            34       5,353              4         -       8,602               -              8,602
                                             General Property, Plant and Equipment, Net (Note 7)                                        -              -          -         1,432           369         334            1         1,038         2,090          94              6         -       5,364               -              5,364
                                             Advances (Note 8)                                                                          -              -          -            27             -           -            -             -             2           5              -         -          34               -                 34
                                             Other Assets                                                                               -              -          -             -           407          10          237             1             -           -              -         -         655               -                655
                                          Total Assets                                                                        $    19,606 $          666 $      152 $      11,460 $     369,777 $     4,162 $     11,210 $       3,270 $      33,219 $    13,237 $          706 $   3,142 $   470,607 $          (352) $         470,255


                                          Stewardship Property, Plant and Equipment (Note 1)


                                          Liabilities (Note 9)
                                              Intragovernmental Liabilities
                                                   Accounts Payable                                                           $          5 $          1 $           2 $         -   $       655 $         18 $          12 $           4 $         24 $        10 $           2 $      2 $        735 $          (170) $             565
                                                   Other Liabilities (Note 13)                                                          31            -             2           109       1,473           21            15           325           28          38           115       34        2,191            (182)             2,009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (in Millions)




                                              Total Intragovernmental Liabilities                                                      36              1             4          109       2,128           39         27              329          52            48        117         36        2,926            (352)             2,574
                                              Accounts Payable                                                                         12              -             6           37         147            5         50               26         271            77         22          9          662               -                662
                                              Entitlement Benefits Due and Payable (Note 10)                                            -              -             -            -      77,277            -          -                -           -             -          -          -       77,277               -             77,277
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           As of September 30, 2013




                                              Accrued Grant Liability (Note 12)                                                     1,289            100            29          375        (424)          (5)       512               22       1,736           157          -        158        3,949               -              3,949
                                              Federal Employee and Veterans Benefits (Note 11)                                          5              -             -           37          15           32         21               82          67            19     11,276         12       11,566               -             11,566
                                              Contingencies and Commitments (Note 14)                                                    -            -              -            -       7,366             1       533          1,000               -          -            -         -        8,900                  -           8,900
                                              Other Liabilities (Note 13)                                                               30            2             15          177       1,354           187        95            267             296         92           50        16        2,581                  -           2,581
                                          Total Liabilities                                                                         1,372            103            54          735      87,863           259      1,238         1,726         2,422           393     11,465        231      107,861            (352)           107,509
                                          Net Position
                                              Unexpended Appropriations - Funds from dedicated collections (Note 21)                    -              -             -         -          4,569        (100)           -             -             -           -             -          -       4,469                  -           4,469
                                              Unexpended Appropriations - Other funds                                              18,227            547            65     6,245         37,655      (2,920)       6,711         1,157        27,762       7,411            50      2,818     105,728                  -         105,728
                                              Unexpended Appropriations, Total                                                     18,227            547            65     6,245         42,224      (3,020)       6,711         1,157        27,762       7,411            50      2,818     110,197             -              110,197
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Consolidated Balance Sheet by Operating Division




                                              Cumulative Results of Operations - Funds from dedicated collections (Note 21)              -             -             -          49      238,145       2,381        2,925             63            430           -           -         3      243,996                  -         243,996
                                             Cumulative Results of Operations - Other funds                                             7             16         33         4,431         1,545       4,542          336           324         2,605       5,433      (10,809)         90       8,553               -              8,553
                                             Cumulative Results of Operations, Total                                                    7             16         33         4,480       239,690       6,923        3,261           387         3,035       5,433      (10,809)         93     252,549               -            252,549
                                          Total Net Position                                                                       18,234            563         98        10,725       281,914       3,903        9,972         1,544        30,797      12,844      (10,759)      2,911     362,746               -            362,746
                                          Total Liabilities and Net Position                                                  $    19,606 $          666 $      152 $      11,460 $     369,777 $     4,162 $     11,210 $       3,270 $      33,219 $    13,237 $        706 $     3,142 $   470,607 $          (352) $         470,255




FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 152
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OTHER INFORMATION
                                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION



                                                 Net Cost of Top 15 Programs
                                              For the Years Ended September 30, 2013 and 2012
                                                                (in Millions)


                                                                                                                            HHS
                                                HHS Net Cost ($)              Rank by ($)                               Responsibility
HHS Program                                   FY 2013        FY 2012       FY 2013    FY 2012     Budget Function         Segment
Medicare                                  $       498,576   $   477,687       1          1      Medicare                    CMS
Medicaid                                          266,624       247,508       2          2      Health                      CMS
Research                                           31,125        32,362       3          3      Health                      NIH
Temporary Assistance to Needy                      18,021        17,131       4          4      Education, Training &       ACF
Families                                                                                        Social Services /
                                                                                                Income Security

Children’s Health Insurance Program                 9,548          9,260      5          5      Health                      CMS
(CHIP)
Head Start                                          7,915          7,805      6          6      Education, Training &       ACF
                                                                                                Social Services /
                                                                                                Income Security

Child Welfare                                       7,719          7,643      7          7      Education, Training &       ACF
                                                                                                Social Services /
                                                                                                Income Security

Child Care                                          5,211          4,982      8          9      Education, Training &       ACF
                                                                                                Social Services /
                                                                                                Income Security

Affordable Care Act Program                         5,047          3,800      9          12     Health                   ACL, CDC,
                                                                                                                         CMS, OS &
                                                                                                                          SAMHSA
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases               4,331          5,484     10          8*     Health                      CDC
(including Infectious Diseases)*
Child Support Enforcement                           4,085          3,955     11          10     Education, Training &       ACF
                                                                                                Social Services /
                                                                                                Income Security

Low-Income Home Energy Assistance                   3,495          3,860     12          11     Education, Training &       ACF
                                                                                                Social Services /
                                                                                                Income Security

Primary Care                                        3,328          3,411     13          13     Health                      HRSA
Clinical Services                                   2,378          2,402     14          15     Health                       IHS
HIV/AIDS Programs                                   2,203          2,414     15          14     Health                      HRSA
Total Top 15 Programs                     $       869,606   $   829,704       x
All Other HHS Programs                             26,833        26,001                         Various                    Various
Total Combined Net Costs                  $       896,439   $   855,705
Eliminations                                        (189)         (158)

Total Consolidated Net Costs of
Operations                                $       896,250   $   855,547



*CDC restructured the GPRA programs based on appropriations bills approved by Congress in FY 2012. The Infectious Disease
program that was previously presented, is now included in the Immunization and Respiratory Diseases program in FY 2013.




Department of Health and Human Services                                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 153
                                                                                                               OTHER INFORMATION



                                          Supplemental Statement of Net Cost
                                           For The Years Ended September 30, 2013 and 2012
                                                             (in Millions)


                                                                                 2013
                                                                     Inter-Agency Eliminations

                                  Agency Combined                                       Earned/Exchange          Consolidated
Responsibility Segments                Totals                     Costs (-)               Revenues (+) *            Totals
ACF                              $            50,559         $                 (53)     $                23    $           50,529
ACL                                            1,445                            (3)                       8                 1,450
AHRQ                                             188                           (15)                    414                    587
CDC                                           10,299                          (129)                    460                 10,630
CMS                                          779,791                          (615)                      46              779,222
FDA                                            1,750                          (237)                      13                 1,526
HRSA                                           8,847                          (217)                      36                 8,666
IHS                                            4,441                          (156)                    165                  4,450
NIH                                           31,125                          (897)                    214                 30,442
OS                                             3,571                          (260)                    537                  3,848
PSC                                            1,041                           (31)                    476                  1,486
SAMHSA                                         3,382                           (71)                    103                  3,414
Net Cost of Operations           $               896,439     $             (2,684)      $             2,495    $            896,250

                                                                                 2012
                                                                     Inter-Agency Eliminations

                                  Agency Combined                                       Earned/Exchange          Consolidated
Responsibility Segments                Totals                     Costs (-)               Revenues (+) *            Totals
ACF                              $            49,134         $                (44)      $                36    $           49,126
ACL                                            1,489                           (6)                        5                 1,488
AHRQ                                             238                          (17)                     415                    636
CDC                                            9,945                         (179)                     481                 10,247
CMS                                          737,823                         (616)                       16              737,223
FDA                                            2,134                         (242)                       30                 1,922
HRSA                                           8,782                         (223)                       49                 8,608
IHS                                            5,766                         (209)                     173                  5,730
NIH                                           32,362                         (945)                     128                 31,545
OS                                             3,325                         (223)                     490                  3,592
PSC                                            1,338                          110                      521                  1,969
SAMHSA                                         3,369                          (66)                     158                  3,461
Net Cost of Operations           $           855,705         $             (2,660)      $            2,502     $         855,547


*Eliminations for non-exchange revenue are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Net Position




Department of Health and Human Services                                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 154
                                                                                                                                                            OTHER INFORMATION



                                               Consolidating Statement of Net Cost by Budget Function
                                                                             For the Year Ended September 30, 2013
                                                                                           (in Millions)


                                                                                                                                 Intra-HHS Eliminations
                           Education,
                           Training, &                                                                     Agency
         Responsibility      Social                                                        Income         Combined                                                     Consolidated
         Segments           Services                 Health               Medicare         Security        Totals                Cost (-)          Revenue                Totals
           ACF             $      12,214         $                -    $             -   $      38,345    $         50,559   $            (53)     $         23          $          50,529
           ACL                       1,445                        -                  -                -              1,445                  (3)               8                      1,450
           AHRQ                            -                 188                     -                -               188                 (15)              414                       587
           CDC                             -               10,299                    -                -             10,299               (129)              460                     10,630
           CMS                             -           281,215              498,576                   -         779,791                  (615)               46                 779,222
           FDA                             -                1,750                    -                -              1,750               (237)               13                      1,526
           HRSA                            -                8,847                    -                -              8,847               (217)               36                      8,666
           IHS                             -                4,441                    -                -              4,441               (156)              165                      4,450
           NIH                             -               31,125                    -                -             31,125               (897)              214                     30,442
           OS                              -                3,571                    -                -              3,571               (260)              537                      3,848
           PSC                             -                1,041                    -                -              1,041                (31)              476                      1,486
           SAMHSA                          -                3,382                    -                -              3,382                (71)              103                      3,414
         Net Cost of
         Operations        $      13,659        $      345,859        $     498,576      $      38,345    $     896,439      $      (2,684)        $    2,495           $       896,250



                                                                      Gross Cost and Exchange Revenue
                                                                             For the Year Ended September 30, 2013
                                                                                           (in Millions)


                                                                      Intragovernmental                                                             With the Public
                                       Gross Cost                                            Less: Exchange Revenue
                                                                                                                                                                    Less:       Consolidated
Responsibility                                                                                                                                                    Exchange       Net Cost of
Segments               Combined        Eliminations           Consolidated           Combined       Eliminations        Consolidated         Gross Cost           Revenue        Operations
  ACF                  $       186     $            (53)      $           133    $         (41)       $        23      $          (18)       $     50,433     $         (19)    $        50,529
  ACL                          11                    (3)                    8               (7)                 8                    1              1,441                -                1,450
  AHRQ                         43                   (15)                   28             (414)               414                  -                 578                (19)               587
  CDC                       860                 (129)                     731             (580)               460                (120)             10,040               (21)             10,630
  CMS                      1,256                (615)                     641              (68)                46                 (22)            848,326           (69,723)            779,222
  FDA                      1,101                (237)                     864              (34)                13                 (21)              2,530            (1,847)              1,526
  HRSA                      357                 (217)                     140              (43)                36                  (7)              8,580               (47)              8,666
  IHS                       580                 (156)                     424             (207)               165                 (42)              5,127            (1,059)              4,450
  NIH                      1,751                (897)                     854             (322)               214                (108)             29,837             (141)              30,442
  OS                        544                 (260)                     284             (581)               537                 (44)              3,616                 (8)             3,848
  PSC                       152                  (31)                     121             (852)               476                (376)              1,809               (68)              1,486
  SAMHSA                    114                  (71)                      43             (121)               103                 (18)              3,389                -                3,414
Totals                 $   6,955       $       (2,684)        $        4,271     $       (3,270)      $   2,495        $         (775)       $    965,706     $     (72,952)    $       896,250




              Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                     FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 155
                                                                                               OTHER INFORMATION




                       IMPROPER PAYMENTS INFORMATION ACT REPORT
1.0 Overview

The Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS or the Department) Fiscal Year (FY) 2013 Improper Payments
Information Act Report includes a discussion of the following information, as required by the Improper Payments
Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) as amended by the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010 (IPERA)
and the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act of 2012 (IPERIA), Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) Circular A-136, and Appendix C of OMB Circular A-123:

    •    Program Descriptions (Section 1.10)
    •    Risk Assessments (Section 2.0)
    •    Statistical Sampling Process (Section 3.0)
              o Error Rate Presentation (Section 3.10)
    •    Corrective Action Plans (Section 4.0)
              o Corrective Actions for Grants (Section 4.10)
    •    Accountability in Reducing and Recovering Improper Payments (Section 5.0)
    •    Information Systems and Other Infrastructure (Section 6.0)
    •    Mitigation Efforts Related to Statutory or Regulatory Barriers (Section 7.0)
    •    Progress and Achievements (Section 8.0)
              o Fiscal Year 2013 Progress (Section 8.10)
              o Fiscal Year 2013 Achievements (Section 8.20)
    •    Improper Payment Reduction Outlook (Section 9.0)
              o Accompanying Improper Payment Reduction Outlook Notes (Section 9.10)
    •    Program-Specific Reporting Information (Section 10.0)
              o Medicare Fee-For-Service (FFS) (Parts A and B) (Section 10.10)
              o Medicare Advantage (Part C) (Section 10.20)
              o Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit (Part D) (Section 10.30)
              o Medicaid (Section 10.40)
              o Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) (Section 10.50)
              o Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (Section 10.60)
              o Foster Care (Section 10.70)
              o Child Care Development Fund (CCDF) (Section 10.80)
    •    Recovery Auditing Reporting (Section 11.0)




 Department of Health and Human Services                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 156
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



1.10 Program Descriptions
The following is a brief description of the risk-susceptible programs discussed in this report:

1. Medicare Fee-For-Service (Parts A and B) - A Federal health insurance program for people age 65 or older,
   people younger than age 65 with certain disabilities, and people of all ages with End-Stage Renal Disease
2. Medicare Advantage (Part C) - A Federal health insurance program that allows beneficiaries to receive their
   Medicare benefits through a private health plan
3. Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit (Part D) - A Federal prescription drug benefit program for Medicare
   beneficiaries
4. Medicaid - A joint Federal/State program, administered by the States, that provides health insurance to certain
   low income individuals
5. Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) - A joint Federal/State program, administered by the States, that
   provides health insurance for qualifying children
6. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) - A joint Federal/State program, administered by the States,
   that provides time-limited assistance to needy families with children to promote work, responsibility and self-
   sufficiency
7. Foster Care - A joint Federal/State program, administered by the States, for children who need placement
   outside their homes in a foster family home or a child care facility.
8. Child Care Development Fund (CCDF) - A joint Federal/State program, administered by the States, that
   provides child care financial assistance to low income working families

2.0 Risk Assessments

In addition to the programs deemed by OMB to be susceptible to significant improper payments, HHS also reviews
other programs to determine if they are susceptible to significant improper payments. In FY 2012, HHS
incorporated the improper payment risk assessment requirements under IPERA and OMB Circular A-123, Appendix
C, into a new risk assessment tool used for multiple purposes. This integrated approach increased efficiency for our
programs without compromising the assessment process. HHS continued using the new integrated risk assessment
approach in FY 2013 and conducted risk assessments on 32 programs; all 32 programs were determined not to be
at-risk for significant improper payments.

3.0 Statistical Sampling Process

Each program’s statistical sampling process is discussed in Section 10: Program-Specific Reporting Information.
Unless otherwise stated in Section 10, all programs complied with the IPIA guidance requiring that all estimates be
based on the equivalent of a statistically valid random sample of sufficient size to yield an estimate with a 90
percent confidence interval of plus or minus 2.5 percentage points around the estimate of the percentage of
erroneous payments. In addition, the seven programs currently reporting error rates used a statistical contractor.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 157
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION



3.10 Error Rate Presentation
OMB Circular A-136 allows agencies to report net error rates in addition to the required gross error rates. Table 1
in Section 9.0: Improper Payment Reduction Outlook presents each program’s gross and net error rates.

The gross error rate is the official program error rate; it is calculated by adding the sample’s overpayments and
underpayments and dividing by the total dollar value of the sample. The net error rate reflects the overall
estimated monetary loss to the program; it is calculated by subtracting the sample’s underpayments from
overpayments and dividing by the total dollar value of the sample.

4.0 Corrective Action Plans

Each program’s Corrective Action Plan (CAP) for reducing the estimated rate of improper payments can be found in
Section 10: Program-Specific Reporting Information. CAPs are used to set aggressive, realistic targets and outline a
timetable to achieve scheduled targets. OMB approves all out-year error rate targets. The Department reviews
CAPs annually to ensure plans focus on the root causes of the errors, thus making it more likely that targets are
met. If targets are not met, HHS will develop new strategies, adjust staffing and other resources, and possibly
revise targets.

4.10 Corrective Actions for Grants
In addition to continuing HHS’ engagement in the development of government-wide grants circulars, as well as our
continuing implementation of HHS regulations and internal policies, the Department has taken the following
actions to strengthen the stewardship of grant funds:

    •    HHS released 11 major internal grants administration policies as part of its update to the Grants Policy
         Administration Manual (GPAM). These policies covered a wide range of topics including but not limited to:
         grants closeout, suspension and debarment, grants systems, and grants payments. The updated guidance
         will facilitate greater financial transparency and accountability, outline consistent grants administration
         practices, and foster program integrity.
    •    As part of the GPAM update, HHS launched a departmental effort to utilize subaccounting for HHS’ newly
         awarded grants, and to transition HHS’ existing grants that receive new funding to subaccounts. This
         internal policy change and procedural adjustment will increase financial accountability across the HHS
         grants community.

5.0 Accountability in Reducing and Recovering Improper Payments

Strengthening program integrity throughout the Department is a top priority of Secretary Sebelius, extending to
HHS Senior Executives and program officials at each of our agencies and programs. As evidence of this focus,
beginning with senior leadership and cascading down, performance plans contain strategic goals that are related
to strengthening program integrity, protecting taxpayer resources, and reducing improper payments. Senior
Executives and programs officials are evaluated as part of their semi-annual and annual performance evaluation on
their progress toward achieving these goals.

6.0 Information Systems and Other Infrastructure

Section 10: Program-Specific Reporting Information details each program’s information systems and other
infrastructure.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 158
                                                                                                  OTHER INFORMATION



7.0 Mitigation Efforts Related to Statutory or Regulatory Barriers

Section 10: Program-Specific Reporting Information reports each program’s statutory or regulatory barriers, if any,
to reduce improper payments.

8.0 Progress and Achievements

8.10 FY 2013 Progress
Since FY 2009, Head Start has reported a consistent decline in its improper payment rate. Head Start reported
annual error rates of 0.6 percent in FY 2011 and FY 2012, demonstrating at least two consecutive years of
improper payments below the IPIA reporting threshold. Based on Head Start’s strong internal controls, monitoring
systems, and low reported error rate, OMB approved HHS’ request for relief from annual improper payment
reporting. In lieu of an annual error rate measurement, HHS will oversee Head Start’s performance through
existing internal controls and monitoring systems, and incorporate the program into the improper payment risk
assessment cycle. In addition, beginning in September 2014, HHS will submit an annual report to OMB that
describes Head Start’s policies, controls, and corrective actions to prevent and mitigate improper payments in the
program, as well as any control deficiencies, risks, and trends that are identified.

8.20 FY 2013 Achievements
8.21 Improving Program Integrity in Medicare and Medicaid
In FY 2013, HHS strengthened its efforts to reduce and recover improper payments in Medicare and Medicaid.
While a few of these efforts are highlighted below, more detailed information on the FY 2013 Medicare and
Medicaid programs’ performance and corrective actions can be found in Section 10: Program-Specific Reporting
Information. In addition, information on the Medicare and State Medicaid Recovery Auditor Contractor (RAC)
programs can be found in Section 11.0: Recovery Auditing Reporting.

Affordable Care Act Enrollment Moratorium
Section 6401 of the Affordable Care Act added new section 1866(j)(7) to the Social Security Act (SSA), which
provides HHS with the authority to impose a moratorium on the enrollment of new providers and suppliers to
prevent or combat fraud, waste, or abuse in Medicare, Medicaid, or CHIP. On July 30, 2013, HHS launched the first
temporary (six month) enrollment moratorium under the Affordable Care Act for Miami-area and Chicago-area
home health agencies and ground ambulance suppliers in the Houston-area. The focus of these efforts is to
prevent and deter fraud, waste, and abuse in problematic services and areas across the country.

Medicare Fraud Prevention System
HHS launched the Fraud Prevention System (FPS) on June 30, 2011, as required by the Small Business Jobs Act of
2010. The FPS analyzes all Medicare FFS claims prior to payment using risk-based algorithms developed by HHS
and the private sector. HHS uses the FPS to target investigative resources to suspect claims and providers and
swiftly impose administrative action when warranted. The system generates alerts in priority order, allowing
program integrity analysts to further investigate the most egregious, suspect, or aberrant activity. HHS and its
program integrity contractors use the FPS information to stop, prevent, and identify improper payments using a
variety of administrative tools and actions, including claim denials, payment suspensions, revocation of Medicare
billing privileges, and referrals to law enforcement.

Within the first year of implementing the FPS, HHS took administrative action against providers based solely on FPS
leads. Through these actions, HHS saved an estimated $115.4 million in payments, comprised of $31.8 million in
estimated actual savings and $83.6 million in estimated projected savings. The FPS also generated leads for 536


 Department of Health and Human Services                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 159
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



new investigations, augmented information for 511 ongoing investigations, and prompted 617 provider interviews
and 1,642 beneficiary interviews to verify whether legitimate Medicare services and supplies were provided. HHS
continues to take action based on the FPS leads and will report updated information as required by the Small
Business Jobs Act of 2010.

Medicaid Integrity Program
Under the authority of the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 (DRA), HHS’ Medicaid Integrity Program has two broad
responsibilities:

    •    To hire contractors to review Medicaid provider activities, audit claims, identify overpayments, and
         educate providers and others on Medicaid program integrity issues.
    •    To provide effective support and assistance to States in their efforts to combat Medicaid provider fraud,
         waste, and abuse.

HHS analyzed Medicaid recoveries, which show that since the enactment of the DRA there has been a strong focus
on Medicaid integrity. For example, the Medicaid Integrity Program has provided the assistance of Federal staff
specializing in program integrity and contractor support to bolster State activities. Based on States’ quarterly
reports to HHS, this assistance resulted in $1.1 billion in recoveries in FY 2013. HHS is also positioned to provide
support to States through funding and technical assistance to implement innovative technology to achieve
additional savings.

8.22 Public Assistance Reporting Information System
The Public Assistance Reporting Information System (PARIS) is a Federal/State partnership with all 50 States, the
District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico that provides State public assistance agencies detailed information and data
to maintain program integrity and detect and deter improper payments in TANF, Medicaid, Workers’
Compensation, Child Care, and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP).

HHS, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and the Department of Defense (DOD) have partnered to advance
the PARIS project at no cost to States. The DOD’s Manpower Data Center (DMDC) provides computer resources to
produce a match file, using Social Security numbers submitted by the States, VA, and DOD as the key match
indicator. States verify the matched individual’s eligibility and take any necessary action. HHS contributes to this
effort by establishing Computer Matching Agreements and coordinating the quarterly matches. PARIS led to
reported savings or cost avoidance of approximately $62 million in FY 2013 alone. More information on this
partnership can be found at: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/paris.




9.0 Improper Payment Reduction Outlook FY 2012 through FY 2016

The following table displays HHS’ IPIA results for the current year (CY) FY 2013, the prior year (PY) FY 2012, and
targets for FYs 2014 through 2016. The table includes the following information by year and program: fiscal year
outlays, the error rate or future target (IP%), and dollars paid or projected to be paid improperly (IP$). In addition,
for the CY, HHS included: the amount of overpayments (CY Overpayments), the amount of underpayments (CY
Underpayments), and the net error rate (CY Net IP%) and the corresponding overpayments, when available.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 160
                                                                                              OTHER INFORMATION




                                                       Table 1
                                          Improper Payment Reduction Outlook
                                                    FY 2012- FY 2016
                                                      (in Millions)




Department of Health and Human Services                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 161
                                                                                                  OTHER INFORMATION



9.10 Accompanying Improper Payment Reduction Outlook Notes
 a) Medicare FFS PY benefit outlays are from the FY 2012 Medicare FFS Improper Payments Report (based on
    claims from July 2010 – June 2011).
 b) Medicare FFS CY benefit outlays are from the FY 2013 Medicare FFS Improper Payments Report (based on
    claims from July 2011 – June 2012).
 c) Medicare FFS CY+1, CY+2, CY+3 benefit outlays are based on the FY 2014 Midsession Review (Medicare
    Benefit Outlays current law (CL)).
 d) Medicare Part C PY benefit outlays reflect 2010 Part C payments, as reported in the FY 2012 Medicare Part C
    Payment Error Final Report.
 e) Medicare Part C CY benefit outlays reflect 2011 Part C payments, as reported in the FY 2013 Medicare Part C
    Payment Error Final Report.
 f) Medicare Part C CY+1, CY+2, CY+3 benefit outlays are based on the FY 2014 Midsession Review (Medicare
    Benefit Outlays (CL)).
 g) Medicare Part D PY outlays reflect 2010 Part D payments, as reported in the FY 2012 Medicare Part D
    Payment Error Final Report.
 h) Medicare Part D CY outlays reflect 2011 Part D payments, as reported in the FY 2013 Medicare Part D
    Payment Error Final Report.
 i) Medicare Part D CY+1, CY+2, CY+3 benefit outlays are based on the FY 2014 Midsession Review (Medicare
    Benefit Outlays (CL)).
 j) Medicaid PY benefit outlays are from the FY 2012 Medicaid Annual Error Rate Report (based on FY 2011
    claims).
 k) Medicaid CY (based on FY 2012 expenditures) and CY+1, CY+2, CY+3 benefit outlays ((based on FY 2013 – FY
    2015 estimated expenditures) (Medicaid Net Benefit Outlays (CL), excluding CDC Program Vaccine for
    Children obligations)), are from the FY 2014 Midsession Review.
 l) CHIP PY benefit outlays are based on the FY 2012 CHIP Annual Error Rate Report (based on FY 2011 claims).
 m) CHIP CY (based on FY 2012 expenditures) and CY+1, CY+2, CY+3 benefit outlays ((based on FY 2013 – FY 2015
    estimated expenditures) (CHIP Total Benefit Outlays with CHIPRA Bonus and Health Care Quality Provisions
    (CL))), are from the FY 2014 Midsession Review.
 n) TANF CY+1, CY+2, CY+3 outlays are based on the FY 2014 Midsession Review (TANF total outlays including the
    Healthy Marriage Promotion and Responsible Fatherhood Grants programs, and excluding the TANF
    Contingency Fund).
 o) Foster Care CY+1, CY+2, CY+3 outlays are based on the FY 2014 Midsession Review, and reflect the Federal
    share of maintenance payments.
 p) Child Care CY+1, CY +2, CY+3 outlays are based on the FY 2014 Midsession Review.


 1. Beginning with the FY 2012 AFR, HHS modified the report period by moving it back six months to more
    accurately measure the improper payment rate in the Medicare FFS program. As a result, the FY 2013
    Medicare FFS report period consists of claims from July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2012. In addition, in FY
    2012, in consultation with OMB, HHS refined the improper payment methodology to account for the impact
    of rebilling denied Part A inpatient claims for allowable Part B services when a Part A inpatient hospital claim
    is denied because the services should have been provided as outpatient services. HHS continued this
    methodology in FY 2013. This approach is consistent with: (1) Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) and
    Departmental Appeals Board (DAB) decisions that directed HHS to pay hospitals under Part B for all of the
    services provided if the Part A inpatient claim was denied, and (2) recent Medicare policy changes that allow
    rebilling of denied Part A claims under Part B.




Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 162
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION



    HHS calculated an adjustment factor based on a statistical subset of inpatient claims that were in error
    because the services should have been provided as outpatient. This adjustment factor reflects the difference
    between what was paid for the inpatient hospital claims under Medicare Part A and what would have been
    paid had the hospital claim been submitted as an outpatient claim under Medicare Part B. Application of the
    adjustment factor decreased the overall improper payment rate by 0.6 percentage points to 10.1 percent or
    $36.0 billion in projected improper payments. Additional information regarding these methodology changes
    and the adjustment factor can be found on pages 166-167 of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR (available at:
    http://wayback.archive-
    it.org/3922/20131030171300/http:/www.hhs.gov/afr/hhs_agency_financial_report_fy_2012-oai.pdf).
 2. In FY 2013, after consultation with OMB, HHS made two improper payment rate calculation methodology
    enhancements to improve the accuracy of the Medicaid improper payment rate estimate. These
    enhancements include: (1) replacing the three-year weighted average national Medicaid improper payment
    rate with a single-year rolling national Medicaid improper payment rate, and (2) incorporating prior year
    State-level improper payment rate recalculations.

    In past AFRs, HHS reported a three-year weighted average national Medicaid improper payment rate
    representing the percentage of expenditures improperly paid over the past three years. The three-year rate
    was calculated by utilizing a weighted average of the Payment Error Rate Measurement (PERM) cycle error
    rates from the three most recent years. This methodology was implemented to ensure Medicaid improper
    payment rate reporting included findings from all States.
    In response to a HHS Office of Inspector General report (OIG report A-06-08-00078, Oversight and Evaluation
    of the Fiscal Year 2007 Payment Error Rate Measurement Program), HHS is now reporting a single-year rolling
    national Medicaid improper payment rate, a more precise estimate that represents the percentage of
    expenditures improperly paid during one fiscal year. The single-year rolling rate is calculated by multiplying
    each State’s most recent error rate by that State’s expenditures from the fiscal year being reported and
    dividing by the expenditures for that fiscal year. The single-year rolling rate treats the three most recent
    PERM cycles as a contiguous sample (as if all States were observed in the fiscal year being reported), which
    allows HHS to report on findings from all States with improved precision.

    Additionally, past AFRs did not incorporate State-level error rate recalculations that occur after the cycle cut-
    off date. For the most recent cycle of States measured, these recalculations occur after AFR publication. In
    response to a Government Accountability Office report (GAO-13-229, Enhancements Needed for Improper
    Payments Reporting and Related Corrective Action Monitoring), State-level error rate recalculations for the
    previous two cycles measured are now incorporated into the national Medicaid improper payment rate, and
    will be incorporated in future calculations.
    HHS calculated and is reporting the national Medicaid error rate that is based on measurements that were
    conducted in FYs 2011, 2012 and 2013. The national Medicaid error component rates are: Medicaid FFS: 3.6
    percent; Medicaid managed care: 0.3 percent; and Medicaid eligibility: 3.3 percent. Under the old calculation
    methodology the FY 2013 national Medicaid error rate would have been 6.1 percent or $15.0 billion instead
    of the 5.8 percent or $14.4 billion reported in FY 2013 using the new calculation methodology.

 3. The two Medicaid improper payment rate calculation methodology enhancements described in note (2) also
    apply to the CHIP improper payment rate estimate with one difference. For FY 2013, only two cycles of States
    have been measured for CHIP requiring a slightly different approach to the single-year CHIP rolling improper
    payment rate. For FY 2013, the 34 measured States will be treated as a contiguous sample and projected to
    the 17 States that have not yet been measured. HHS calculated and is reporting a national CHIP error rate
    based on measurements that were conducted in FYs 2012 and 2013. The national CHIP error component
    rates are: CHIP FFS: 5.7 percent; CHIP managed care: 0.2 percent; and CHIP eligibility: 5.1 percent. Under the


Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 163
                                                                                                OTHER INFORMATION



    old calculation methodology the FY 2013 national CHIP error rate would have been 7.5 percent or $0.7 billion
    instead of the 7.1 percent or $0.6 billion reported in FY 2013 using the new calculation methodology.

 4. The baseline measurement for CHIP, based on the measurement of 50 States and the District of Columbia
    over a three-year period (FYs 2012 to FY 2014), will be published in the FY 2014 AFR. Therefore, setting out-
    year target rates for CHIP is not applicable at this time.

 5. The TANF program is not reporting an error rate for FY 2013. Statutory limitations prohibit HHS from
    requiring States to participate in a TANF improper payment measurement.

 6. After the publication of the FY 2012 AFR, HHS determined that it had overstated the FY 2012 Child Care
    improper payment estimate due to incorrect data for a small number of States that was not detected prior to
    the AFR’s publication. HHS implemented corrective actions – including additional data reviews – to prevent
    this mistake from reoccurring. The FY 2012 improper payment estimate was 9.2 percent or $474 million
    rather than the published improper payment estimate of 9.4 percent or $488 million. For consistency with
    the FY 2012 AFR, this table includes the improper payment estimate that was reported in the FY 2012 AFR.




Department of Health and Human Services                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 164
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



10.0 Program-Specific Reporting Information

10.10 Medicare Fee-for-Service or FFS

10.11 Medicare FFS Statistical Sampling Process
Medicare FFS uses the Comprehensive Error Rate Testing (CERT) program to calculate the improper payment
estimate. The CERT program considers any claim paid when it should have been denied or was paid in the wrong
amount (including both overpayments and underpayments) to be an improper payment. To meet this objective, a
random sample of Medicare FFS claims is reviewed to determine if claims were paid properly under Medicare
coverage, coding, and billing rules. If these criteria are not met, the claim is counted as either a total or partial
improper payment, depending on the error category. Approximately 54,000 claims were sampled during the FY
2013 report period. The CERT program ensures a statistically valid random sample; therefore, the improper
payment rate calculated from this sample reflects all claims processed by the Medicare FFS program during the
report period. Additional information on the Medicare FFS improper payment methodology can be found on pages
166-167        of      HHS’        FY        2012        AFR,       available      at:      http://wayback.archive-
it.org/3922/20131030171300/http:/www.hhs.gov/afr/hhs_agency_financial_report_fy_2012-oai.pdf.

The Medicare FFS gross improper payment estimate for FY 2013 is 10.1 percent or $36.0 billion. The FY 2013 net
improper payment estimate is 9.3 percent or $33.2 billion.

10.12 Medicare FFS Corrective Action Plans
The primary cause of improper payments is Administrative and Documentation errors (63 percent), in large part
due to insufficient documentation. The other cause of improper payments is classified as Authentication and
Medical Necessity errors (37 percent), caused by medically unnecessary services, and to a lesser extent, incorrect
diagnosis coding.

Data shows that many improper payments resulted from claims paid for services that are clinically appropriate, if
provided in less intensive settings. Physicians and DME suppliers contributed substantially to insufficient
documentation errors, and hospitals contributed substantially to medical necessity errors. Coding errors were
most prevalent in physician services.

HHS developed an Error Rate Reduction Plan (ERRP) that outlines actions the agency will implement to prevent and
reduce improper payments for all categories of error. Of particular importance are three corrective actions that
HHS believes will have a considerable effect in preventing and reducing improper payments:

  • First, HHS is expanding the use of Medicare FFS RACs in the Medicare FFS program. Over the past several
    years, Medicare FFS RACs have recovered billions of taxpayer dollars by finding improper payments that have
    already been paid by the Medicare FFS program. HHS now allows the Medicare FFS RACs to review certain
    types of claims that historically have high amounts of improper payments before they are paid, therefore
    preventing improper payments from being made in the first place. This demonstration project began for
    claims processed on or after September 1, 2012. Through this prepayment demonstration, HHS has already
    saved approximately $22.3 million in improper payments from being made. More information on the
    Medicare FFS RAC prepayment review demonstration can be found at: http://www.cms.gov/Research-
    Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Monitoring-Programs/Recovery-Audit-
    Program/RecoveryAuditPrepaymentReview.html.

 •   Second, on September 1, 2012, HHS instituted a prior authorization demonstration program in seven States
     with the expectation of reducing improper payments for power mobility devices. This demonstration project



 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 165
                                                                                                  OTHER INFORMATION



      has already led to a decrease in the expenditures for power mobility devices in the demonstration States as
      well as in the non-demonstration States. Specifically, based on claims submitted as of September 30, 2013,
      monthly expenditures for the power mobility devices included in the demonstration States decreased from
      $20 million in September 2012 to $9 million in August 2013, and from $12 million to $4 million in the non-
      demonstration States for the same time period. Prior authorization reviews are being performed timely,
      industry feedback has been positive, and HHS has received no complaints from beneficiaries. HHS continues
      to closely monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the demonstration and plans to analyze demonstration
      data to assist in the investigation and prosecution of fraud. More information on the power mobility device
      prior authorization demonstration can be found at: http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-
      Systems/Monitoring-Programs/CERT/Prior-Authorization-of-PMDs-Demonstration-Status-Update-.html.

  • Third, HHS implemented two major policies pertaining to inpatient hospital claims that are expected to
    reduce improper payments:
         -    HHS issued an interim measure, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Ruling 1455–R (78
              FR 16614, issued on March 13, 2013), which ended the demonstration project that allowed hospital
              participants to bill for inpatient Part B claims when their Part A claim was denied as not reasonable
              and necessary, and expanded this concept for all hospitals. Proposed Rule 1455-P (78 PR 16632,
              issued on March 13, 2013), as finalized in 1599-F (78 FR 50495, issued on August 2, 2013), permitted
              inpatient Part B billing within one year from the date of service. The final measure 1599-F became
              effective, and Ruling 1455-R became inapplicable, on October 1, 2013.
         -    Final measure 1599-F (78 FR 50495) also clarified and modified HHS policy regarding when an
              inpatient admission is generally appropriate for payment under Medicare Part A and how Medicare
              review contractors will assess hospital inpatient claims for payment purposes.

In addition to these three major efforts and the ongoing corrective actions reported on pages 167-169 of HHS’ FY
2012 AFR, HHS has implemented additional efforts to reduce improper payments in the Medicare FFS program as
outlined below.

Corrective Actions: Administrative and Documentation Errors
   • HHS continues to build the Healthcare Fraud Prevention Partnership (HFPP), a public-private partnership to
      improve detection and prevention of health care fraud, waste, and abuse. Public and private partners,
      including Federal and State partners, private payers, associations, and law enforcement exchange data and
      successful anti-fraud practices within the HFPP, helping to prevent and detect fraud across sectors.

   • HHS, in close collaboration with its Regional Offices, holds program integrity education events for physicians
     and other providers. These events, typically held in medical schools or hospitals, offer continuing medical
     education credits (CME) through local provider organizations. As part of its broader outreach activities, HHS
     created educational materials tailored specifically for physicians, industry stakeholders, and beneficiaries.
     These materials include fact sheets, guidance documents, frequently asked questions, and CME through
     Medscape, a company that offers free online news and education for providers. HHS also engaged in direct
     outreach through live events and speaking engagements.

  •    HHS requires its Medicare review contractors to focus their medical review efforts on identifying
       documentation errors in certain error prone claim types, such as home health, hospital outpatient, skilled
       nursing facility (SNF), and nonhospital-based hospice claims.

Corrective Actions: Authentication and Medical Necessity Errors
  • HHS contracted with a Supplemental Medical Review/Specialty Contractor to perform medical reviews
     focused on vulnerabilities identified by HHS internal data analysis, the CERT program, professional
     organizations, and Federal oversight agencies. The contractor evaluates medical records and related



 Department of Health and Human Services                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 166
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



     documents to determine whether claims were billed in compliance with Medicare coverage, coding,
     payment, and billing rules.

  • HHS implemented the Medicare Part B Outpatient Therapy Cap Exceptions Process, which mandates manual
    medical review on claims when the beneficiary exceeds the annual $3,700 therapy threshold. On April 1,
    2013, the Medicare FFS RAC program began prepayment manual medical review on therapy claims above the
    threshold in 11 demonstration States. In the remaining States, the Medicare FFS RAC program conducted
    post-payment manual medical reviews on therapy claims above the threshold.

  • HHS continues to allow Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) and RACs to review more claim types
    than in previous years, while closely monitoring the decisions made by these contractors. The MACs’ medical
    review resulted in a projected savings of $5.6 billion in FY 2013.

  • HHS continues to develop and issue Comparative Billing Reports (CBRs) to help non-hospital providers
    analyze their coding and billing practices for specific procedures or services. CBRs are proactive statements
    that enable providers to examine their billing patterns compared to their peers in the State and nation.

10.13 Medicare FFS Improper Payment Recovery
The actual overpayments identified in the FY 2013 Medicare FFS Improper Payments Report were $40,000,013.
The identified overpayments are to be recovered by the Medicare contractors via standard payment recovery
methods. As of the report publication date, Medicare contractors reported collecting $33,196,339 or 83 percent of
the actual overpayment dollars identified in the report.

10.14 Medicare FFS Information Systems and Other Infrastructure
HHS has the information systems and other infrastructure it needs to reduce improper Medicare FFS payments to
the targeted levels. HHS’ systems have the ability to identify developing and continuing aberrant billing patterns
based upon a comparison of local payment rates with national rates. The systems at both the Medicare contractor
level and the HHS level are tied together by a high-speed secure network that allows rapid transmission of large
data sets between systems. No other systems or infrastructure are needed at this time.

10.15 Medicare FFS Statutory or Regulatory Barriers That Could Limit Corrective Actions
No statutory or regulatory barriers that could limit corrective actions have been identified at this time.

10.16 Medicare FFS Best Practices
The CERT program has incorporated the following best practices to ensure the highest degree of efficiency:

  • HHS provides multiple resources to educate providers and suppliers about the CERT program, including
    several websites, a toll-free customer service telephone line, and on-line reference materials.

  • HHS holds weekly calls with all CERT contractors and MACs to facilitate communication, solve problems, and
    improve the CERT process.

  • CERT collaborates with other review contractor entities, such as the MACs and Medicare FFS RACs, to clarify
    unclear policies, in an effort to ensure review consistency.

  • HHS provides interim improper payment rate data to the MACs to help them focus on problematic areas and
    identify emerging vulnerabilities.
In addition, HHS continues to improve the Medicare FFS improper payment rate measurement program to ensure
that providers and suppliers submit the required documentation. Such improvements include:

  • HHS coordinates provider outreach and education task forces. These task forces consist of MAC medical
    review professionals who meet regularly to develop strategies addressing provider education in areas prone


 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 167
                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION



     to improper payments. The task forces hold open door forums to discuss documentation requirements and
     answer provider and supplier questions, and distribute informational articles as needed to improve
     documentation and to educate providers on Medicare policies. The articles are maintained online on the
     Medicare Learning Network (MLN) and can be accessed by the public at the MLN website:
     http://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education/Medicare-Learning-Network-
     MLN/MLNGenInfo/index.html?redirect=/mlngeninfo.

  • HHS conducts ongoing education to inform providers and suppliers about the importance of submitting
    thorough and complete documentation. This education involves national training sessions, individual
    meetings with providers or suppliers with high improper payment rates, presentations at industry association
    meetings, and the dissemination of educational materials.

  • HHS revises medical record request letters, as needed, to clarify the components of the medical record
    required for CERT review. The letter serves as a checklist for the provider or supplier to ensure their record
    submission is complete. Follow-up medical record request letters have also been developed to explain the
    missing documentation that needs to be submitted.

  • When a supplier is contacted for documentation, HHS notifies the ordering provider that they may be
    contacted by the supplier in order to provide supporting documentation. In addition to this notification, HHS
    contacts third party providers to request documentation when the billing provider indicates that a portion of
    the medical record is possessed by a third party. For example, a third party provider may be a physician who
    orders a power wheelchair from a supplier that submits the claim.

  • HHS regularly examines the reasons for errors and makes efforts to collect medical documentation that
    support the submitted claim, such as through additional phone calls requesting the specific documentation
    that is missing.

10.20 Medicare Advantage or Part C

10.21 Part C Medicare Advantage Statistical Sampling Process
The FY 2013 Medicare Part C gross improper payment estimate, based on 2011 payments is 9.5 percent or $11.8
billion. The FY 2013 net improper payment estimate is 5.6 percent or $6.9 billion.

The Part C methodology estimates errors resulting from incorrect beneficiary risk scores. The primary component
of a beneficiary’s risk score is based on clinical diagnoses submitted by plans. If the diagnoses submitted to HHS
are not supported by medical records, the risk scores will be inaccurate and result in payment errors. The Part C
estimate is based on medical record reviews conducted under HHS’ annual Risk Adjustment Data Validation (RADV)
process, where unsupported diagnoses are identified and corrected risk scores are calculated.

The FY 2013 methodology consists of the following steps:

  • Selection of a stratified random sample of beneficiaries for whom a risk adjusted payment was made in CY
    2011, where the strata are high, medium, and low risk scores,

  • Medical record review of the diagnoses submitted by plans for the sampled beneficiaries,

  • Calculation of beneficiary-level payment error for the sample, and

  • Extrapolation of the sample payment error to the population subject to risk adjustment, resulting in a Part C
    gross payment error amount.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 168
                                                                                                  OTHER INFORMATION



As disclosed in the FY 2012 AFR, due to significant improvements in the Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug
(MARx) Payment Error (MPE) component estimate, the MPE was not included in the FY 2013 Part C error rate
calculation per OMB approval, and will not be included in future measurements.

10.22 Medicare Advantage Corrective Action Plans
The root cause (100 percent) of FY 2013 Medicare Part C improper payments resulted from Administrative and
Documentation errors due to insufficient documentation to support diagnoses submitted by the plans.
HHS has implemented three key initiatives as part of its corrective action plan to address errors in the Part C
program. The three initiatives are as follows:

  • Contract-Level Audits: HHS has proceeded with the RADV contract-level audits to recover overpayments.
    RADV verifies, through medical record review, the accuracy of enrollee diagnoses submitted by Medicare
    Advantage (MA) organizations for risk adjusted payment. RADV audits are HHS’ primary corrective action to
    recoup improper payments. HHS expects that payment recovery will have a sentinel effect on the quality of
    risk adjustment data submitted by plans for payment. HHS expects to conduct RADV audits for approximately
    30 MA contracts annually. RADV audits of payment year 2011, expected to begin in FY 2014, will be the first
    HHS reviews to conduct payment recovery based on extrapolated estimates.

  • Medicare Advantage Organization Guidance and Training: HHS conducts national training sessions for MA
    organizations that provide comprehensive assistance for submitting accurate risk adjustment data. In
    addition, HHS has identified risk adjustment diagnoses that are more likely to be associated with payment
    error. HHS will continue to analyze diagnoses to determine high-error diagnoses and use these findings to
    conduct outreach, education, and provide guidance to MA organizations.

      Furthermore, HHS implemented a process to assist plans’ submission of medical record documentation. To
      assist plans and reduce administrative error, HHS extended the medical record submission timeframe and
      provided outreach to plans during the National Risk Adjustment payment error data validation process. HHS
      also provides preliminary results to the MA plans and feedback on the validity of submitted records to ensure
      they are suitable for the Part C error estimate reviews.

  • Physician Outreach: HHS enhances physician understanding of HHS payment procedures for MA
    organizations and the payment methodology impact on physicians. This outreach seeks to improve
    physicians’ medical record documentation practices to support risk adjustment diagnoses.

10.23 Medicare Advantage Program Improper Payment Recovery
The Part C error estimate is based on a national sample of beneficiaries across all MA plans. Since this type of
sample design does not allow for collection at the MA plan level, no payment recovery had been initiated until FY
2012, when HHS recovered approximately $3.4 million for the first five plans involved in the 2007 RADV audits (the
pilot audits) (Note: The FY 2012 Medicare Part C RADV audit amount recovered was amended from $3.5 million, as
reported in the FY 2012 AFR, to $3.4 million, due to a reporting discrepancy that was identified after the AFR was
published). In FY 2013, HHS continued payment recovery for plans under the 2007 RADV audits and recovered
approximately $5 million.

10.24 Medicare Advantage Information Systems and Other Infrastructure
HHS has the information systems and other infrastructure needed to reduce improper Part C payments. HHS uses
the following internal Medicare systems to make and validate the Part C payments: the Medicare Beneficiary
Database, the Risk Adjustment System, the Health Plan Management System, and the MARx payment system. No
other systems or infrastructure are needed at this time.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 169
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



10.25 Medicare Advantage Statutory or Regulatory Barriers that could limit Corrective Actions
No statutory or regulatory barriers that could limit corrective actions have been identified at this time.

10.26 Medicare Advantage Program Best Practices
HHS has taken several steps to ensure payment accuracy in the Part C program, including the corrective actions
that were outlined earlier in Section 10.22.

10.30 Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit or Part D

10.31 Medicare Prescription Drug Statistical Sampling Process
The Medicare Part D gross improper payment estimate for FY 2013 is 3.7 percent or $2.1 billion. The FY 2013 net
improper payment estimate is 2.4 percent or $1.4 billion.

The FY 2013 Part D Composite Payment Error Rate combines four component payment error measures:

  •   Payment Error Related to Low Income Subsidy Status (PELS),
  •   Payment Error Related to Medicaid Status (PEMS),
  •   Payment Error Related to Prescription Drug Event Data Validation (PEPV), and
  •   Payment Error Related to Direct and Indirect Remuneration (PEDIR).

Combining these four component measures poses complex technical and statistical challenges in calculating a
confidence interval for the composite rate. As a result, HHS calculated the precision level for each component
independently, and each component meets OMB precision requirements.

The FY 2013 national Part D improper payment rate for each component is:

  •   PELS: 0.2 percent
  •   PEMS: 0.4 percent
  •   PEPV: 2.8 percent
  •   PEDIR: 0.3 percent

The methodology for calculating the PELS, PEMS, PEPV, and PEDIR rates was not altered from FY 2012. A
description of the methodology may be found on pages 173-175 of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR. In addition, as disclosed in
the FY 2012 AFR, due to significant improvements in the MPE component estimate, the MPE component was not
included in the FY 2013 Part D calculation per OMB approval, and will not be included in future measurements.

10.32 Medicare Prescription Drug Corrective Action Plan
The root cause of all FY 2013 Part D improper payments (100 percent) is Administrative and Documentation errors.
HHS conducted the following corrective actions to address errors in the respective Part D component measures:

  • HHS analyzed the PELS error estimate to further understand the PELS population and identify additional steps
    that can be taken to address errors. In addition, HHS provided guidance to Part D sponsors to update
    beneficiary LIS status prior to reconciliation.

  • The Medicaid corrective actions identified in Section 10.42 will assist in reducing the PEMS error estimate, as
    this component is driven by the Payment Error Rate Measurement (PERM) program findings.

  • HHS continued national training sessions for Medicare Part D plans. Training provides comprehensive
    information on all aspects of Part D payment and data submission requirements, including sessions focusing
    on improvements in prescription drug event (PDE) record submission, which is reflected in the PEPV error
    rate estimate.


 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 170
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



  • To assist plans with improved DIR reporting in the future, HHS required plans to submit DIR amounts by
    National Drug Code (NDC).

10.33 Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Improper Payment Recovery
HHS conducted the following improper payment recovery activities in FY 2013 for each error rate component:

  • PELS Component: Further investigation must be done to better determine how to conduct payment recovery.

  • PEMS Component: Application of the national Medicaid active case eligibility error rate to Part D payments
    does not allow HHS to identify which dual eligible beneficiaries actually had incorrect Medicaid status. Thus,
    it is not possible to identify beneficiary-level payments that HHS could recover.

  • PEPV Component: The FY 2013 PDE validation is based on a national sample of PDEs and the imputation of
    these results onto the Part D population; therefore, payment errors cannot be linked to specific beneficiaries
    for payment recovery purposes.

  • PEDIR Component: The original data used to develop the FY 2013 error rate was based on 2010 audits. Plans
    submit updates to their reported DIR amounts on a flow basis. HHS will, therefore, address payment recovery
    through the 2010 Part D reconciliation.

10.34 Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Information Systems and Other Infrastructure
HHS has the information systems and other infrastructure needed to reduce improper Medicare Part D payments.
HHS uses the following internal Medicare systems to make and validate the Part D payments: the Medicare
Beneficiary Database, the Risk Adjustment System, the Health Plan Management System, the MARx payment
system, and the Integrated Data Repository. No other systems or infrastructure are needed at this time.

10.35 Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Statutory or Regulatory Barriers that could limit Corrective
Actions
No statutory or regulatory barriers that could limit corrective actions have been identified at this time.

10.36 Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Program Best Practices
In addition to the corrective actions outlined in Section 10.32, HHS has taken steps to ensure payment accuracy in
the Medicare Part D program, including: (1) contacting plans before and during the PEPV data collection and
validation process, which provides an open forum for improving instructions for data submission, and (2) extending
the data collection period, which increased response rates.

10.40 Medicaid

10.41 Medicaid Statistical Sampling Process
The national FY 2013 Medicaid error rate is based on measurements conducted in FYs 2011, 2012, and 2013.
Medicaid improper payments are estimated on a Federal fiscal year basis and measure three component error
rates: FFS, managed care, and eligibility. HHS, through its use of Federal contractors, measures the FFS and
managed care components and States perform the eligibility component measurement.

The PERM program uses a 17 State three-year rotation for measuring Medicaid improper payments. For
information on how HHS grouped States into each of the three cycles, please see pages 177-179 of HHS’ FY 2012
AFR.

FFS and Managed Care Component
States submit quarterly adjudicated claims data from which a randomly selected sample of FFS claims and
managed care payments are drawn each quarter. Each selected FFS claim is subjected to a medical and data



 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 171
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION



processing review. Managed care payments are subject only to a data processing review. The FFS sample size was
between 260 and 968 claims per State and the managed care sample size was between 240 and 280 payments per
State. For FY 2013, the sample sizes were based on each State’s historical FFS and managed care improper
payment rate data. When a State’s FFS component or managed care component accounted for less than two
percent of the State’s total Medicaid expenditures, the State’s FFS and managed care claims were combined into
one component for sampling and measurement purposes. This consolidation occurred in five of the 17 States in
this year’s cycle.

Eligibility Component
States conducted an eligibility review on a randomly selected sample of between 144 and 972 active cases and
between 132 and 420 negative cases. The difference in sample sizes is based on the State’s historical eligibility
improper payment rate data.

Active cases contain information on a beneficiary who is enrolled in the program in the month that eligibility is
reviewed. Negative cases contain information on an individual who applied for benefits and was denied, or whose
program benefits were terminated based on the State agency’s eligibility determination in the month that
eligibility is reviewed.

HHS calculated two error rates for active cases, the payment error rate and the case error rate.

  • The payment error rate is calculated using the weighted dollar value of payments made for services provided
    to beneficiaries who were ineligible for the program or received a service that was not included in the
    beneficiary’s benefit package divided by the weighted dollar value of claims for the sample of beneficiaries
    each month (i.e., weighted dollars in error over total weighted dollars in the sample). HHS combines the
    State reported eligibility component payment error rates to develop a national eligibility error rate for
    Medicaid.
  • The case error rate is calculated by dividing the projected number of ineligible beneficiaries by the projected
    total number of beneficiaries. HHS calculates only a case error rate for negative cases, because no payments
    were made.

In August 2013, HHS released guidance announcing temporary changes to future PERM eligibility reviews, in light
of changes to the way States adjudicate eligibility for Medicaid and CHIP starting in 2014. These changes will
impact Medicaid and CHIP improper payment rates reported starting with the FY 2015 AFR.

Calculations and Findings
The national Medicaid program improper payment rate represents the combination of each State’s Medicaid FFS,
managed care, and eligibility improper payment rates. In addition, individual State improper payment rate
components are combined to calculate the national improper payment rates for each component. National
component improper payment rates and the Medicaid program improper payment rate are weighted by State size,
so that a State with a $10 billion program “counts” 10 times more toward the national rate than a State with a $1
billion program. A small correction factor ensures that Medicaid eligibility improper payments do not get “double
counted.”

In FY 2013, HHS made two improper payment rate methodology enhancements to improve the accuracy of the
Medicaid improper payment rate estimate:

  •    Single-year Rolling Rate: HHS replaced the three-year weighted average national Medicaid improper
       payment rate with a single-year rolling national Medicaid improper payment rate.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 172
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



  •       Error Rate Recalculations: HHS incorporated prior year State-level improper payment rate recalculations.
          Seven State-level FFS error rates were recalculated subsequent to FY 2012 reporting and are incorporated
          into FY 2013 improper payment rate reporting.

See Section 9.10: Accompanying Improper Payment Reduction Outlook Notes, note (2) for detailed information on
the two improper payment rate calculation methodology enhancements.

The national Medicaid gross improper payment estimate for FY 2013 is 5.8 percent or $14.4 billion. The FY 2013
net improper payment estimate is 5.5 percent or $13.5 billion.

The FY 2013 national Medicaid improper payment rate for each component is:

      •     Medicaid FFS: 3.6 percent
      •     Medicaid managed care: 0.3 percent
      •     Medicaid eligibility: 3.3 percent

Within the Medicaid eligibility improper payment rate, the active case improper payment rate is 2.9 percent and
the negative case improper payment rate is 4.2 percent.

Under the old calculation methodology the FY 2013 national Medicaid error rate would have been 6.1 percent or
$15.0 billion instead of the 5.8 percent or $14.4 billion reported in FY 2013 using the new calculation methodology
enhancements.

10.42 Medicaid Corrective Action Plans
States reviewed for the FY 2013 AFR measurement were the same States reviewed in FY 2010. The re-
measurement of these States reflects the impact of effective corrective action plans implemented after the last
measurement. The improper payment rate for these States dropped from 9.0 percent in FY 2010 to 5.7 percent in
FY 2013, causing a decrease in the FY 2013 national Medicaid error rate. The eligibility component reported the
greatest improvement, dropping from 7.6 percent to 3.3 percent.

Overall, the largest cause of the FY 2013 improper payments (by dollar amount) was Verification errors (46
percent), which were mostly caused by cases reviewed for eligibility that were either not eligible or their eligibility
status could not be determined, and system pricing errors. The second largest cause of improper payments was
Administrative and Documentation errors (35 percent), which were mostly due to insufficient documentation. The
remaining improper payments were attributed to Authentication and Medical Necessity errors (19 percent), and
were mostly due to diagnosis coding errors.

HHS works closely with all States to develop State-specific Corrective Action Plans (CAPs). All States are responsible
for implementing, monitoring, and evaluating the effectiveness of their CAPs. HHS received CAPs from all States
whose Medicaid programs were previously measured, and all States measured in FY 2013 are in the process of
developing their CAPs for submission to HHS. When developing the CAPs, States focus their efforts on the major
causes of improper payments where the State can clearly identify patterns. In addition, States also take steps to
reduce errors identified during the measurement.

Because much of the Medicaid FFS improper payment rate in the past was due to missing or insufficient
documentation, the majority of State CAPs focused on provider communication and education. These methods
included holding provider training sessions and meetings with provider associations; issuing provider notices,
bulletins, newsletters, alerts, and surveys; implementing improvements and clarifications to written State policies
emphasizing documentation requirements; and performing more provider audits. State CAPs also target eligibility



 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 173
                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION



errors through the leveraging of technology and available databases to obtain eligibility verification information
without client contact; providing caseworker training, particularly in areas determined by the PERM review to be
error-prone; and providing additional eligibility policy resources through a consolidated manual and web-based
training.

In addition to the development, execution, and evaluation of the State-specific CAPs and the ongoing corrective
actions reported on pages 179 – 181 of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR, HHS has implemented additional efforts to lower
improper payments rates:

  • HHS began “mini-PERM audits” with two States. Mini-PERM audits are voluntary State-specific improper
    payment reviews, intended to assist States in identifying and eliminating improper payments during years
    States are not measured under PERM. These reviews assist States in developing targeted CAPs to decrease
    Medicaid improper payments.

  • As of September 30, 2013, 45 States and the District of Columbia have implemented Medicaid RAC programs
    to identify and recover overpayments and identify underpayments made for services in their Medicaid
    programs. The remaining five States have HHS-approved exceptions.

  • HHS created a process to allow States to share information on terminated providers and to view information
    on Medicare providers and suppliers with revoked billing privileges.

  • HHS formed a State systems workgroup (that includes representatives from HHS and State staff) to address
    individual State system problems that may cause payment errors. More information on this effort can be
    found in Section 10.44: Medicaid Information Systems and Other Infrastructure.

10.43 Medicaid Program Improper Payment Recovery
HHS identified $1,516,184; $1,633,991; and $153,188 in Medicaid overpayments eligible for recovery for FYs 2011,
2012 and 2013, respectively. The decrease in Medicaid overpayments eligible for recovery in FY 2013 compared to
FYs 2011 and FY 2012 was due to: (1) a decrease in the dollar value of overpayments that were identified in the
sample, and (2) the exclusion of overpayments due to eligibility errors because PERM does not recover
overpayments for the eligibility component. In addition, the amount of Medicaid overpayments eligible for
recovery for FYs 2011 and 2012 was amended from information previously reported in HHS’ FY 2012 AFR to also
exclude overpayments due to eligibility errors.

HHS works closely with States to recover overpayments identified from the FFS and managed care claims sampled
and reviewed. The recoveries of Medicaid improper payments are governed by Section 1903(d)(2) of the SSA and
related regulations at 42 CFR Part 433, Subpart F under which States must return the Federal share of
overpayments. Section 6506 of the Affordable Care Act amended section 1903(d)(2) to allow States up to one year
from the date of discovery of an overpayment for Medicaid services to recover, or to attempt to recover, such
overpayment before making an adjustment to refund the Federal share of the overpayment.

10.44 Medicaid Information Systems and Other Infrastructure
Since Medicaid payments occur at the State level, information systems and other infrastructure needed to reduce
Medicaid improper payments would need to be implemented at the State level. PERM faced many challenges with
State payment systems that had paper only and aggregate claims, changes in information systems at the State
level during the course of the measurement cycle, and a wide variation of system designs and capabilities. HHS has
encouraged and supported States in their efforts to modernize and improve State Medicaid Management
Information Systems (MMIS), which will produce greater efficiencies in the PERM measurement and strengthen
program integrity. The State systems workgroup meets regularly to identify and discuss vulnerabilities and the




 Department of Health and Human Services                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 174
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



impact on the measurement of improper payments. In addition, HHS developed a methodology to measure
aggregate claims that have been incorporated into the PERM processes.

HHS developed a comprehensive plan to modernize the Medicaid and CHIP data systems. The primary goal of this
plan is to leverage technologies to create an authoritative and comprehensive Medicaid and CHIP data structure so
that HHS can provide more effective oversight of its programs. The plan will also result in a reduction of State
burden and the availability of more robust data for the PERM program.
HHS is also developing the Transformed Medicaid Statistical Information System (T-MSIS). T-MSIS will facilitate
State submission of timely claims data to HHS, expand the MSIS dataset, and allow HHS to review the
completeness and quality of State MSIS submittals in real-time. HHS will use this data for the Medicaid improper
payment measurement and to satisfy other HHS requirements. Through the use of T-MSIS, HHS will not only
acquire higher quality data, but will also reduce State data requests. States will move to T-MSIS on a rolling basis
with the goal of having all States submitting data monthly by July 1, 2014.

10.45 Medicaid Statutory or Regulatory Barriers that could limit Corrective Actions
No statutory or regulatory barriers that could limit corrective actions have been identified at this time.

10.46 Medicaid Program Best Practices
Based on lessons learned through previous PERM cycles and in an effort to address challenges faced by the States,
HHS continues the pre-cycle phase of the PERM measurement. The pre-cycle phase occurs prior to a State’s first
data submission, and allows HHS to disseminate information on changes in the program and to conduct individual
orientation and education sessions with the States. In addition to the ongoing measures reported on pages 182 -
183 of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR, HHS incorporated the following efforts into the Medicaid measurement process:

  • HHS issued State-specific error rate targets. State-level goals for reducing improper payments provide a
    foundation for meeting national Medicaid improper payment targets. Collaboration between HHS and the
    States is vital to achieve national and State-specific targets.

  • HHS issued updated CAP development guidance for States and improved protocols for HHS’ review of State
    CAPs. These improvements ensure that State CAPs fully address errors and reduce improper payments.

  • HHS continues to offer training, technical assistance, and support to State Medicaid program officials through
    the Medicaid Integrity Institute (MII). Between FYs 2008 and 2013, the MII provided training to over 4,000
    State employees and officials from 50 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.


10.50 Children’s Health Insurance Program or CHIP
10.51 CHIP Statistical Sampling Process
HHS calculated and reports the national CHIP improper payment rate based on measurements conducted in FYs
2012 and 2013. CHIP improper payments are estimated on a Federal fiscal year basis and measure three
component error rates: FFS, managed care, and eligibility. HHS, through its use of Federal contractors, measures
the FFS and managed care components and States perform the eligibility component measurement.

CHIP utilizes the same State sampling process as Medicaid. HHS determined that CHIP can be measured in the
same States selected for Medicaid review each fiscal year with a high probability that the CHIP improper payment
rate will meet the IPIA required confidence and precision levels. Since CHIP and Medicaid will be measured in the
same States each year, each State will be measured for CHIP once every three years. For information on how HHS
grouped States into each of the three cycles, please see pages 177-179 of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 175
                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION



FFS and Managed Care Component
States submit quarterly adjudicated claims data from which a randomly selected sample of FFS claims and
managed care payments are drawn each quarter. Each selected FFS claim is subjected to a medical and data
processing review. Managed care payments are subject only to a data processing review. The average FFS sample
size was 520 claims per State and the average managed care sample size was 280 payments per State.

Under Section 601 of the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 (CHIPRA), beginning in
FY 2012 States could elect to accept or reject their previously reported CHIP improper payment rate. If a State
elected to accept their previous CHIP improper payment rate, the State would utilize a State-specific sample size
based on that rate. Since no historical improper payment rate data was available for States reviewed in FY 2013,
State-specific samples were not utilized during this measurement cycle.

When a FFS component or managed care component for a State accounted for less than two percent of the State’s
total CHIP expenditures, the State’s FFS and managed care claims were combined into one component for
sampling and measurement purposes. This consolidation occurred for claims in three States.

Eligibility Component
States conducted an eligibility review on a randomly selected sample of 504 active cases and 204 negative cases.
Since no historical eligibility improper payment rate data was available for States reviewed in FY 2013, State-
specific sample sizes were not utilized during this measurement cycle.

HHS calculated two error rates for active cases, the payment error rate and the case error rate. The methodologies
for these calculations are the same as those applied to Medicaid. Please see Section 10.41 for further explanation
of active and negative cases. In addition, the temporary changes to future PERM eligibility reviews that are
discussed in Section 10.41 also apply to the CHIP measurement.

Calculations and Findings
All payment error rate calculations for the CHIP program (the FFS component, managed care component, eligibility
component, and national CHIP error rate) are based on the ratio of estimated dollars of improper payments to the
estimated dollars of total payments. Individual State improper payment rate components are combined to
calculate the national component improper payment rates. The national CHIP improper payment rate is calculated
by combining the individual State improper payment rates. National component improper payment rates and the
CHIP improper payment rate are weighted by State size, so that a State with a $1 billion program “counts” 5 times
more toward the national rate than a State with a $200 million program. The national CHIP improper payment rate
represents the combination of FFS, managed care, and eligibility improper payment rates. A small correction factor
ensures that CHIP eligibility improper payments do not get “double counted.”

The two Medicaid improper payment rate methodology enhancements described in Section 10.41 also apply to the
CHIP improper payment rate estimate with one difference. For FY 2013, only two cycles of States have been
measured for CHIP requiring a slightly different approach to the single-year CHIP rolling improper payment rate
until all three cycles of States are measured in FY 2014. For FY 2013, the 34 measured States will be treated as a
contiguous sample and projected to the 17 States that have not yet been measured. Only two State-level FFS error
rates were recalculated subsequent to FY 2012 reporting and are incorporated into FY 2013 improper payment
rate reporting. See Section 9.10: Accompanying Improper Payment Reduction Outlook Notes, notes (2) and (3) for
detailed information on the two improper payment rate methodology enhancements.

The national CHIP improper payment estimate for FY 2013 is 7.1 percent or $646 million. The FY 2013 net
improper payment estimate is 6.9 percent or $624 million.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 176
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



The FY 2013 national CHIP improper payment rate for each component is:

    •    CHIP FFS – 5.7 percent
    •    CHIP managed care – 0.2 percent
    •    CHIP eligibility – 5.1 percent

Within the CHIP eligibility error rate, the active case error rate is 7.2 percent and the negative case error rate is
3.7 percent.

Under the old calculation methodology the FY 2013 national CHIP error rate would have been 7.5 percent or $0.7
billion instead of the 7.1 percent or $0.6 billion reported in FY 2013 using the new calculation methodology
enhancements.

10.52 CHIP Corrective Action Plans
HHS actively works with States to develop CAPs to address errors. HHS’ experience is that improper payments are
typically higher in the early years of improper payment measurement programs because the process is new. HHS
expects CHIP improper payments to decrease as States refine their outreach and documentation efforts. Overall,
the majority of the FY 2013 improper payments (by dollar amount) were a result of Verification errors (50
percent), which were mostly caused by cases reviewed for eligibility that were not eligible. The second largest
cause of improper payments was Authentication and Medical Necessity errors (29 percent), which were mostly
due to policy violations. The third leading cause of errors was Administrative and Documentation errors (21
percent), which were mostly due to insufficient and no documentation errors.

HHS works closely with all States to develop State-specific CAPs. All States are responsible for implementing,
monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of their CAPs. HHS received CAPs from all States whose CHIP programs
were measured and reported in FY 2012, and all States that measured in FY 2013 are in the process of developing
their CAPs for submission to HHS. When developing the CAPs, States focus their efforts on the major causes of
improper payments where the State can clearly identify patterns. In addition, States take steps to reduce errors
identified during the measurement.

Because much of the CHIP FFS improper payment rate has been due to missing or insufficient documentation, the
majority of State CAPs focused on strengthening provider communication and education. These methods included
enhancing provider training, presentations, newsletters, notices, bulletins, and provider broadcasts; conducting
outreach to public providers; and performing more provider audits. For eligibility errors, State corrective actions
included clarifying written State policies, particularly documentation requirements; launching a more advanced
and improved electronic client eligibility system; providing refresher training for eligibility staff, particularly in
areas determined by the PERM review to be error-prone; and producing informational broadcasts regarding error
information and changes to eligibility policy and procedures. In addition to the development, execution, and
evaluation of the State-specific CAPs, HHS has also made significant efforts to lower improper payments rates:

  • HHS began “mini-PERM audits” with three States. Mini-PERM audits are voluntary, State-specific improper
    payment reviews, intended to assist States in identifying and eliminating improper payments during years
    States are not measured under PERM. These reviews assist States in developing targeted CAPs to decrease
    CHIP improper payments.

  • HHS created a process to allow States to share information on terminated providers and to view information
    on Medicare providers and suppliers with revoked billing privileges.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 177
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



  • HHS continues provider outreach efforts, provider open forum calls, PERM+ data submission option
    implementation, aggregate payments methodology implementation, national best practice calls, post-CAP
    meetings, and State system workgroup meetings as discussed on pages 180-181, of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR.

10.53 CHIP Program Improper Payment Recovery
HHS identified $355,399 and $172,482 in CHIP overpayments eligible for recovery for FYs 2012 and 2013
respectively. The decrease in CHIP overpayments eligible for recovery in FY 2013 compared to FY 2012 was due to:
(1) a decrease in the dollar value of overpayments that were identified in the sample, and (2) exclusion of
overpayments due to eligibility errors because PERM does not recover overpayments for the eligibility component.
In addition, the amount of CHIP overpayments eligible for recovery for FY 2012 was amended from information
previously reported in HHS’ FY 2012 AFR to also exclude overpayments due to eligibility errors.

HHS works closely with States to recover overpayments identified from the FFS and managed care claims sampled
and reviewed. Recoveries of CHIP improper payments are governed by Section 2105(e) of the SSA and related
regulations at 42 CFR Part 457, Subpart B under which States must return the Federal share of overpayments.
States reimburse HHS for the Federal share on the CHIP CMS-21 expenditure report. Section 2105(c)(6)(B) of the
SSA incorporated the overpayment requirements of Section 1903(d)(2) for CHIP. Section 6506 of the Affordable
Care Act amended section 1903(d)(2) to allow States up to one year from the date of discovery of an overpayment
for services to recover, or to attempt to recover, such overpayment before making an adjustment to refund the
Federal share of the overpayment.

10.54 CHIP Information Systems and Other Infrastructure
Since CHIP payments occur at the State level, information systems and other infrastructure needed to reduce CHIP
improper payments would need to be implemented at the State level. Please refer to Section 10.44: Medicaid
Information Systems and Other Infrastructure for information on HHS- and State-led efforts to modernize
information and data systems at the national and State level.

10.55 CHIP Statutory or Regulatory Barriers that Could Limit Corrective Actions
No statutory or regulatory barriers that could limit corrective actions have been identified at this time.

10.56 CHIP Best Practices
Based on lessons learned through previous PERM cycles and in an effort to address challenges faced by the States,
HHS continues the pre-cycle aspect of the PERM measurement. The pre-cycle phase occurs prior to a State’s first
data submission, and allows HHS to disseminate information on changes in the program and to conduct individual
orientation and education sessions with the States. In addition to the Medicaid Program Best Practices outlined in
Section 10.46, the following measures have been incorporated into the CHIP measurement process:

  • States are educated on the PERM process through HHS-initiated cycle calls and website activity.

  • HHS designated a cycle manager as the lead for a fiscal year measurement and the main point of contact at
    HHS for that year.

  • HHS utilized dashboards, a compilation of the contractors’ and States’ work, to monitor the progress of the
    measurement. The dashboards enable HHS to monitor problems in the measurement early and provide
    assistance to resolve issues that could delay the measurement process.

  • HHS used monthly all-contractor meetings to facilitate communication and problem solving between HHS
    and its contractors to improve the PERM process.

  • For States having difficulty providing complete data, HHS has provided onsite technical assistance.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 178
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION



10.60 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families or TANF

10.61 TANF Statistical Sampling Process
Statutory limitations prohibit HHS from requiring States to participate in a TANF improper payment measurement.
As a result, the TANF program is not reporting an error rate for FY 2013.

10.62 TANF Corrective Action Plans
Since TANF is a State-administered program, corrective actions that could help reduce improper payments would
have to be implemented at the State level. The TANF statute prohibits HHS from requiring State TANF agencies to
implement and report on corrective actions. Despite the limitations, HHS has taken the following actions to assist
States in reducing improper payments:
  • HHS is working with States to analyze Single Audit findings related to TANF and to implement corrective
     actions to address these findings.

  • HHS performed a detailed risk assessment of the TANF program. As part of this process, HHS identified
    potential programmatic risks at the Federal level and is working to mitigate these programmatic risks.

  • HHS awarded two TANF Program Integrity Innovation Grants to State human service agencies with funding
    from OMB’s Partnership Fund for Program Integrity Innovation. The grantees will conduct pilot projects that
    are designed to reduce improper payments and improve administrative efficiency in their TANF
    programs. Lessons learned from the pilots will be used to improve internal efficiency and provide guidance to
    other State human service agencies looking to improve TANF program integrity.

  • HHS released guidance to State human service agencies, in a question and answer format, related to
    appropriate use of TANF program funds.

10.63 TANF Improper Payments Recovery
Statutory limitations prohibit HHS from requiring States to participate in a TANF improper payment measurement.
As a result, HHS is not reporting an error rate or any results from improper payment recoveries for FY 2013.

10.64 TANF Information Systems and Other Infrastructure
Information systems and other infrastructure needed to reduce TANF improper payments would need to be
implemented at the State level. States utilize PARIS, the National Directory of New Hires (NDNH), and the Income
and Eligibility Verification System (IEVS) to minimize improper payments. No other systems or infrastructure are
needed at this time.

10.65 TANF Statutory or Regulatory Barriers
Statutory limitations prohibit HHS from requiring States to participate in a TANF improper payment measurement.

10.66 TANF Program Best Practices
HHS encourages States to stress the importance of payment accuracy for TANF cases and seriously consider
measures that will reduce the incidence of erroneous payments. Actions that may prove beneficial include, but
are not limited to:

  • Conduct local office quality control reviews for eligibility and payment processes at both the initial intake and
    redetermination stages of the case, and perform periodic “checks” of case records, paying particular
    attention to documentation such as a current application and facts supporting income, household
    composition, participation in work activities, and cooperation with child support enforcement.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 179
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



  • Develop and maintain a reminder system for critical follow-up actions on cases such as responding to reports
    of non-cooperation with child support, IEVS “hits”, redeterminations of eligibility, or failure to fulfill work
    requirements.

  • Remind TANF recipients periodically of their responsibility to accurately report income, resources, and other
    changes in family circumstances to the local TANF agency on a timely basis; to use NDNH information to
    verify the eligibility of adult TANF recipients residing in the State; and to modify benefits or close the case if
    the individual is not eligible for assistance.

  • Conduct training on investigative interviewing techniques for intake workers and case managers.

  • Establish and monitor internal procedures to ensure that TANF payments are adjusted on a timely basis when
    family circumstances change and affect case eligibility or the amount of payment, and establish a process for
    the collection of TANF overpayments from the applicable recipients.

10.70 Foster Care

10.71 Foster Care Statistical Sampling Process
There were no changes to the statistical sampling process for Title IV-E Foster Care in FY 2013. The Foster Care
improper payment estimate is calculated each year using data collected in the most recent Foster Care Eligibility
Review for each State. Under the regulatory review promulgated at 45 CFR 1356.71, Foster Care Eligibility Reviews
are conducted systematically in each State every three years. Each regulatory review identifies the number of error
cases and amount of payment errors, as determined from the review of a sample drawn from the State’s overall
Title IV-E Foster Care caseload for its six-month Period Under Review (PUR). The sample is a random sample drawn
from the universe of cases having at least one Title IV-E Foster Care maintenance payment during the PUR. Since
each State is reviewed every three years, each year’s data incorporates new review data for about one-third of the
States. For a more detailed description of the Foster Care improper payments statistical sampling and estimation
methodology, please see pages 189-190 of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR.

The Foster Care gross improper payment estimate for FY 2013 is 5.3 percent or $69.7 million. The FY 2013 net
improper payment rate is 4.2 percent or $56.0 million.

10.72 Foster Care Corrective Action Plans
All payment errors (100 percent) in the Title IV-E Foster Care Program are Administrative and Documentation
errors due to incorrect case classification and payment processing by State agencies. The Foster Care program
designs corrective action plans to help States address these payment errors that contribute most to Title IV-E
improper payments.

Corrective actions have decreased the overall number of payment errors and altered the composition of identified
payments errors. For example, following years of work with State Court Improvement Programs and outreach to
heighten judicial awareness, judiciary-related errors, once the most prevalent error type, are now among the least
common.

HHS continues to monitor review results and analyze the types of payment errors in the Foster Care program to
target corrective action planning. In FY 2013, the most common payment errors included:

    •    Underpayments (29 percent of errors),
    •    Ineligible payments (e.g., therapy or unallowable transportation costs) (11 percent of errors),
    •    Family not eligible for the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program at time of removal (8 percent
         of errors),



 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 180
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION



    •    Duplicate or excessive maintenance payments to providers (8 percent of errors),
    •    Provider not licensed or approved (7 percent of errors), and
    •    Provider criminal records check not completed (6 percent of errors).

Together these six items continue, as in past years, to account for nearly 70 percent of Foster Care payment errors;
however, the overall frequency of all types of payment errors in the composite Foster Care sample decreased by 9
percent from FY 2012 to FY 2013. In addition, although underpayments represent nearly one-third of all errors in
terms of frequency, the dollar amount of the underpayments decreased, as the underpayment rate improved from
0.7 percent in FY 2012 to 0.5 percent in FY 2013.
In FY 2013, HHS undertook the following key actions to reduce improper payments:

  • Program leadership convened meetings with Federal Regional Office staff to share information about the
    Foster Care program’s improper payment estimates and to highlight the importance of achieving HHS’
    performance goals.
  • The National Team Leader for the Title IV-E Foster Care Eligibility Reviews conducted training at all ten
    Regional Offices on current Foster Care eligibility requirements and guidance on identifying improper
    payments. This in-depth training enhanced Federal staff’s knowledge of program requirements, allowing
    them to better work with States to improve performance.

In addition, HHS continued the following ongoing corrective actions:

  • HHS conducts onsite and post-site review activities to validate the accuracy of State claims for
    reimbursement of payments made on behalf of children and their Foster Care providers. Specific feedback is
    provided onsite to the State agency to positively affect proper and efficient program administration and
    implementation. Furthermore, HHS issues a comprehensive final report that presents findings of the review
    to the State agency. The final report serves as the basis for the development of a Program Improvement Plan
    (PIP) for States that exceed the error threshold.

  • HHS requires non-compliant States (those that exceed the error threshold) to develop and execute State-
    specific PIPs that link corrective actions to the root cause of payment errors. The PIP identifies the specific
    action steps necessary to target and correct error root causes. To ensure the timely error correction, each
    action strategy is required to have a projected completion within one year from the date HHS approved the
    PIP. PIPs are a proven and effective strategy, as reflected in the decrease of the national Title IV-E error rate
    since FY 2004.

  • HHS provides training and technical assistance to States to develop and implement program improvement
    strategies, even when States are not required to develop a PIP. The intent of this assistance is to help States
    expand organizational capacity and promote more effective program operations.

  • HHS conducts secondary reviews, as applicable, and takes appropriate disallowances consistent with the
    review findings, including an extrapolated disallowance if the State is found not in substantial compliance.
    These additional disallowances, in conjunction with the development and implementation of the PIP, serve as
    a strong incentive to States to improve compliance.

10.73 Foster Care Improper Payment Recovery
As a result of conducting Foster Care eligibility reviews in 18 States during the 12-month period between July 2012
and June 2013, HHS recovered over $1.1 million in Title IV-E improper payments. The recovered funds are
comprised of $627,686 in disallowed maintenance payments and $459,781 in disallowed administrative payments.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 181
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



Improper payment recovery occurs through post-payment review, through both eligibility reviews as well as audit
reviews. The Foster Care program does not systematically track cost recovery through OIG reviews or Single Audit
reports; rather, the program obtains this information from HHS reports generated as part of the audit clearance
process. Specifically, the program identifies and tabulates audit findings where the audit has been closed and a
recommended cost recovery has been sustained for the Title IV-E Foster Care program. These recovery amounts
are in addition to the amounts identified through the eligibility reviews and are presumed to be recovered in the
fiscal year when the audit is closed. Recoveries of improper payments through audits may include Title IV-E Foster
Care maintenance assistance payments, administration, training, and automated systems development costs. See
Section 11.0 for further information on payment recovery.

10.74 Foster Care Information Systems and Other Infrastructure
HHS uses the Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System for the regulatory reviews. Utilization of this
system reduces the burden on States to draw their own samples, promotes uniformity in sample selection, and
employs the database in a practical and beneficial manner. Since Foster Care payments occur at the State level,
information systems and other infrastructure needed to reduce Foster Care improper payments would need to be
implemented at the State level. No other systems or infrastructure are needed at this time.

10.75 Foster Care Statutory or Regulatory Barriers
No statutory or regulatory barriers that could limit corrective actions have been identified at this time.

10.76 Foster Care Best Practices
Since the inception of its improper payment reporting, HHS has maintained a diligent focus on improper payment
identification and reduction efforts in the Foster Care program. Refinements to the error rate methodology have
included steps to ensure systematic examination and consideration of underpayments in eligibility reviews and
modifying data retention practices to permit shifting from case-based extrapolation to dollar-based extrapolation.

Concurrent with these efforts to continually refine its identification and reporting of improper payments, HHS
works with State child welfare agencies to improve administrative procedures for tracking and documenting
eligibility. HHS also works with the judiciary to support adherence to requirements for timely and thoroughly
documented case hearings and court orders. These efforts have yielded reductions in eligibility errors and
improper payments, as well as the recovery of $17.9 million in improper payments.

In addition to the ongoing efforts to address improper payments as outlined above, the Foster Care program
continues to lay the groundwork for a new methodology to review administrative payments (i.e., Administrative
Cost Review or ACR). In FY 2013, HHS issued final reports for two FY 2012 pilot tests of the ACR methodology and
transmitted the results to State agency leadership for their consideration. Recommendations focused on improving
allocation and assignment of administrative costs to Title IV-E Foster Care. HHS has compiled all ACR pilot results
(nine reviews conducted between FY 2007 and FY 2012), and HHS is currently analyzing these results to determine
how best to utilize the ACR process in the future.

10.80 Child Care or CCDF

10.81 Child Care Statistical Sampling Process
There were no changes to the statistical sampling process in FY 2013. For the CCDF improper payments statistical
sampling methodology, please see: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/occ/data_final_0.pdf.

The CCDF methodology distinguishes between authorizations for payment and actual payments made to providers.
Therefore, the amount of improper authorizations for payment identified during the review process does not




 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 182
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



represent actual improper payments. In general, the amount of payments is lower, computed to be on average
about 17 percent lower.

The CCDF gross improper authorizations for payment estimate for FY 2013 is 5.9 percent or $306 million. The FY
2013 net improper payment estimate is 5.0 percent or $260 million.

10.82 Child Care Corrective Action Plans
Administrative and Documentation errors account for an estimated 51 percent of errors identified in the CCDF
Improper Authorizations review process. Errors were primarily due to missing or insufficient documentation. The
most frequently cited errors due to missing or insufficient documentation include:

  • Insufficient documentation of earned income, unearned income, and income deductions,

  • Insufficient documentation of the hours of care needed,

  • Missing or incomplete documentation about the work, or educational or training activity of the head of
    household, and

  • Missing case records.
Verification errors represent approximately 49 percent of errors found in the reviews. Verification errors occur
when there is a lack of information to verify portions of the case record. These errors consist of the failure to apply
policy correctly, including:

  • Income calculation errors (inability to determine income calculation method, or use of an incorrect monthly
    conversion factor),

  • Incorrect computation of the hours of care needed,

  • Inclusion or exclusion of income,

  • Co-pay calculation errors, including incorrect use of the fee schedule,

  • Failure to process reported changes, and

  • Data errors.
HHS and States have established corrective actions targeting both error types. States’ efforts include:

  • Performing ongoing case record reviews: Eight of 17 States measured in FY 2013 conducted reviews or re-
    reviews of cases to monitor error-prone policy areas and review supporting documentation to ensure correct
    policy application.

  • Developing comprehensive training plans: Twelve of 17 States measured in FY 2013 developed aggressive
    training plans that included policy clarifications, calculation tools, and checklists for supervisors and workers
    to ensure accuracy in eligibility processing and the targeting of specific errors, such as income calculation, co-
    payment, and fee schedules.

  • Enhancing automated systems: Ten of 17 States measured in FY 2013 implemented automation changes to
    track attendance, issue caseworker alerts for action items, produce monitoring reports, and generate
    computer edits.

  • Performing ongoing program monitoring: Eight of 17 States measured in FY 2013 created performance
    improvement plans, performance expectations, and targeted corrective actions for managers to include in
    their monitoring procedures.



 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 183
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



HHS’ corrective actions include:

  • Providing technical assistance through on-site visits, webinars, interactive online meetings, conference calls,
    and written documents. These were specifically designed to help States focus on staff training, eligibility
    determination policies and procedures, documentation requirements, routine case reviews, and overall
    program administration.

  • Providing States with an opportunity for peer-to-peer sharing of both error causes and program
    improvements, in an effort to reduce and/or eliminate improper payments. States were able to share
    information with each other during Regional calls with State Administrators, at Regional and National
    meetings, and through conference calls.

  • Implementing the technical assistance tool “Grantee Internal Control Self-Assessment Instrument” with
    States with high error rates to help them assess their internal control system, identify areas of risk, develop
    mitigation strategies, and receive technical assistance as they implement corrections. Seven of the States
    measured during FY 2013 were visited by HHS representatives to help complete the self-assessment between
    their previous review and this review.

10.83 Child Care Program Improper Payment Recovery
The cumulative FY 2013 CCDF improper overauthorizations for payments amount is $505,094. The overall error
estimate is comprised of three review cycles: FYs 2011, 2012, and 2013. The improper overauthorizations for
payments are as follows for each cycle: Year One States (reported in FY 2011) - $155,883, Year Two States
(reported in FY 2012) - $146,914, and Year Three States (reported in FY 2013) - $202,297. (Note: After the
publication of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR, HHS determined that it had provided incorrect totals for the improper
overauthorizations identified in previous reviews. The figure for Year 1 States’ (reported in FY 2011) estimated
improper overauthorizations was previously reported as $159,012, but the correct figure is $155,883.)

The FY 2013 review cycle represents the second time that Year Three States have conducted the error rate
measurement. Compared to FY 2010, the last time this cycle of States was measured, the improper
overauthorizations for payment amount declined by $193,932 (from $396,229 to $202,297). (Note: After the
publication of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR, HHS determined that it had provided incorrect totals for the improper
overauthorizations identified in previous reviews. The figure for the Year 3 States’ (reported in FY 2010) estimated
improper overauthorizations was previously reported as $384,748, but the correct figure is $396,229.)

Overall, States estimate that they will recover 16 percent of the $505,094 identified as overauthorizations during
the complete review cycle. Year Three States expect to recover an estimated 21 percent, or $42,117, of the
$202,297 in overauthorizations for payment identified during the review. The current review methodology only
requests that States provide an estimate for projected recoveries identified from the sampled cases. Requesting
information regarding actual collections would violate the Paperwork Reduction Act. The planned revision,
effective in FY 2014, to measure payments instead of authorizations for payment, will require grantees to provide
information on both the estimate they expect to recover in the future and any funds recovered from prior reviews.

10.84 Child Care Program Information Systems and Other Infrastructure
Since CCDF payments occur at the State level, information systems and other infrastructure needed to reduce
CCDF improper payments would need to be implemented at the State level. In addition to the efforts outlined on
page 198 of HHS’ FY 2012 AFR, States reported a range of improvements to information systems including:

  • Incorporating the Federal case review worksheet or a facsimile in the automated eligibility system, and,

  • Providing eligibility staffs with access to eligibility systems for other programs like TANF and SNAP.



 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 184
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



10.85 Child Care Program Statutory or Regulatory Barriers
No statutory or regulatory barriers that would limit corrective actions have been identified at this time.

10.86 Child Care Program Best Practices
The “best practices” or “lessons learned” most frequently cited by the Year Three States, based on their
experiences in two review cycles, include the following:

  • Centralized case-record reading: This practice supported the re-review process through consistent policy
    interpretation, error definition, and copying record materials; regular reviewer meetings to discuss issues;
    and the management of operational costs.

  • Starting the planning process early: All phases of the measurement process took longer than States expected.
    Starting the process earlier allowed time to react to the unexpected, such as sampling problems or delays,
    review-team issues, or record-reading problems.

  • Ongoing case-record reviews: Several Year Three States continued or began to incorporate case record
    reviews into ongoing monitoring processes to improve practices and reduce errors. Results from these
    reviews informed training needs, policy and procedure revisions, and increased productivity and accuracy.

11.0 Recovery Auditing Reporting

From FY 2004 to FY 2006, HHS awarded a contingency fee contract to a recovery auditing firm to review $24 billon
in contract payments made from FY 2002 to FY 2005. During that review, the recovery auditors found the HHS
payment systems to be without major program integrity issues. The auditors identified approximately $1.6 million
in potential recoveries and HHS recovered $74,401. We have not sought a contractor to attempt to recover funds
beyond FY 2005 because our efforts to date have produced such small recoveries.

More recently, HHS created a risk-based strategy to implement the recovery auditing provisions of IPERA.
Specifically, HHS is focusing initially on implementing recovery audit programs in Medicare and Medicaid, which
accounted for 85 percent of HHS’ outlays in FY 2013. In addition, HHS is also exploring implementing recovery
audit programs in a cost-effective manner for additional programs, which account for the remaining HHS’ outlays.
In the meantime, we are making substantial progress in recovering improper payments in Medicare and Medicaid,
as described below.
Medicare FFS RACs
Section 302 of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 required HHS to implement the Medicare FFS RAC
program in all 50 States no later than January 1, 2010. In FY 2013, the Medicare FFS RAC program demanded
approximately $4.2 billion and recovered $3.7 billion in overpayments by the end of the fiscal year. The difference
in the amount of improper payments identified compared to the amount of improper payments recovered was
due to several factors, including: extended repayment plans; bankruptcies; investigations by the HHS Office of
Inspector General, the Department of Justice, or Zone Program Integrity Contractors; and provider or supplier
appeals of overpayment determinations. During FY 2013, the Medicare FFS RACs focused their reviews on short
hospital stays and claims for durable medical equipment. HHS continues to monitor and make continuous
improvements to the Medicare FFS RAC program activities.

In addition to using the Medicare FFS RACs to identify overpayments, HHS also uses Medicare FFS RAC findings to
prevent future improper payments. For example, in FY 2013, HHS released four Provider Compliance Newsletters
that provided detailed information on 30 findings identified by the Medicare FFS RACs. Based on these findings,
HHS also implemented local and/or national system edits to automatically prevent improper payments.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 185
                                                                                                       OTHER INFORMATION



More information on the Medicare FFS RAC program can be found at: http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-
Data-and-Systems/Monitoring-Programs/Recovery-Audit-Program/.
Medicare Part C and Part D RACs
Section 6411(b) of the Affordable Care Act expanded the RAC program to Medicare Parts C and D. Procurement
activities for the Part C RAC are ongoing and an award is expected in FY 2014.
The Part D RAC program became fully operational in FY 2012, and is currently reviewing prescription drug claims
for calendar years 2008 through 2011. Since its launch, the Part D RAC identified overpayments made as a result of
prescriptions written by excluded providers or filled at excluded pharmacies. In FY 2013, approximately $1.8
million in overpayments were recouped from plans as a result of overpayments that were identified during FY
2012 (but that were not recovered that year). Similarly, at the end of FY 2013, HHS sent notification letters for
additional overpayments totaling approximately $3.4 million to plans. For those plans that do not appeal,
overpayment recoupment will begin in FY 2014 and will be reported in the FY 2014 AFR.
In FY 2014, the Part D RAC will review excluded providers, duplicate payments, and Direct and Indirect
Remuneration (which includes discounts, rebates, cash discounts, and other types of benefits). In the future, the
Part D RAC may expand its reviews.
More information on the Medicare Part C and Part D RAC programs can be found at:
http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Monitoring-Programs/recovery-audit-program-parts-
c-and-d/.html.

State Medicaid RACs
Section 6411(a) of the Affordable Care Act required each State to establish State Medicaid RAC programs by
submitting a State plan amendment, which attests that its program meets the statutory requirements by
December 31, 2010. States were required to implement RAC programs by January 1, 2012; thus, FY 2013 is the first
full Federal fiscal year of reporting State Medicaid RAC recoveries. As States continue to implement their State
Medicaid RAC programs, State Medicaid RAC Federal-share recoveries reported by States increased from $57.6
million in FY 2012 to $74.5 million in FY 2013. States have increased the total Federal and State share combined
amount of Medicaid RAC recoveries from $95.6 million in FY 2012 to $124.3 million in FY 2013.

HHS regulations align the State Medicaid RAC requirements to existing Medicare FFS RAC program requirements,
where feasible, and provide each State the flexibility to tailor its RAC program where appropriate. As of September
30, 2013, 45 States and the District of Columbia have implemented Medicaid RAC programs. The remaining 5
States have time-limited HHS-approved exemptions.

HHS provides guidance to States as each State implements its Medicaid RAC program. In September 2012, HHS
launched a tool to encourage transparency and monitoring called the State Medicaid RACs At-A-Glance website.
This tool can be found at: http://w2.dehpg.net/RACSS/Map.aspx. The website contains State-reported information
on each State’s Medicaid RAC program, the name of each RAC vendor and Medical Director, and contact
information for the State Program Integrity Director.

Recovery Auditing Reporting Tables
OMB Circular A-136 requires agencies to provide detailed information on their recovery audit programs, as well as
other efforts related to the recapture of improper payments. Some of our programs have results to report in this
area and those results are included in the following tables. If a program is not listed on a certain table, it is because
they do not yet have results in that area.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 186
                                                                                         OTHER INFORMATION




                                                  Table 2
                                      Payment Recapture Audit Reporting
                                                  FY 2013
                                                 (in Millions)




Department of Health and Human Services                                   FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 187
                                                                                                                                                      OTHER INFORMATION




                                                                                 Table 3
                                                           Payment Recapture Audit Targets
                                                                      FY 2013
                                                                               (in Millions)

                                                                                            CY                                                                         CY + 3
                                                                                                                       CY + 1                    CY + 2
      Type of                    CY                              CY                    Recovery Rate                                                                  Recovery
                                                                                                                    Recovery Rate             Recovery Rate
      Payment               Amount Identified              Amount Recovered         (Amount Recovered                                                                   Rate
                                                                                                                       Target                    Target
                                                                                    / Amount Identified)                                                               Target


Medicare FFS                      $4,234.9                     $3,650.9                       86%                          85%                       85%                  85%
Recovery Auditors

Medicare Part D                     $3.4                         $1.8                         53%                          85%                       85%                  85%
Recovery Auditors

Note: The State Medicaid recovery auditors are not included in this table since States do not report information to HHS that would allow the Department to calculate the amount of
overpayments identified, the recovery rate, or the recovery rate targets.


                                                                                 Table 4
                                                    Aging of Outstanding Overpayments
                                                                   FY 20131
                                                                               (in Millions)


                                    CY Amount Outstanding                               CY Amount Outstanding                               CY Amount Outstanding
 Type of Payment
                                        (0 – 6 months)                                    (6 months to 1 year)                                   (over 1 year)

Medicare FFS                                  $1,004.2
                                                                                                  $210.4                                                N/A
Recovery Auditors                          Note 2 & Note 3

Medicare Part D                                  N/A
                                                                                                    N/A                                                 N/A
Recovery Auditors                              Note 4

Notes:

   1. The State Medicaid recovery auditors are not included in this table since States do not report information to HHS that would allow the Department to calculate the amount
         of overpayments that are currently outstanding.
   2. The amount of outstanding Medicare FFS recovery auditors overpayments identified in this table ($1,214.6 million) does not match the amount
      outstanding identified in Table 3 because this table includes information from FY 2013 only whereas Table 3 includes information on recoveries from
      multiple years.
   3. Under the Medicare FFS recovery auditors program, recovery of identified overpayments cannot begin until the overpayment is at least 41 days old. Therefore, the CY
      Amount Outstanding (0-6 months) includes identified overpayments that HHS cannot begin collecting.
   4. Recoupments of FY 2013 overpayments will not begin on the Medicare Part D recovery auditors’ overpayments until the appeals process is complete. The appeals
      process is ongoing, but is expected to be completed by the 3rd quarter of FY 2014.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 188
                                                                                                                                           OTHER INFORMATION




                                                                            Table 5
                                                       Disposition of Recaptured Funds
                                                                   FY 20131
                                                                 (in Millions)

                                                                              Financial
                        Agency Expenses             Payment
                                                                            Management                                     Office of Inspector            Returned to
 Type of Payment        to Administer the       Recapture Auditor                                  Original Purpose
                                                                            Improvement                                          General                   Treasury
                            Program                   Fees
                                                                              Activities

Medicare FFS                                                                                            $3,094.4
                              $152.4                   $301.7                     N/A                                              N/A              N/N      N/A AA
Recovery Auditors                                                                                        Note 2

Medicare Part D                                                                                           $1.6
                                N/A                     $0.2                      N/A                                              N/A                    N/N N/A AA
Recovery Auditors                                                                                        Note 3

  Notes:
  1. The State Medicaid recovery auditors are not included in this table since States do not report information to HHS on how the recoveries are used.
  2. For the Medicare FFS recovery auditors program, funds included under the “Original Purpose” column were returned to the Medicare Trust Funds after taking into
      consideration agency expenses to administer the program and recovery auditors contingency fees (amounts are listed above) and underpayments to providers ($102.4
      million).
  3. For the Medicare Part D recovery auditors program, funds included under the “Original Purpose” column were returned to the Medicare Trust Funds.




    Department of Health and Human Services                                                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 189
                                                                                                                           OTHER INFORMATION




                                                                    Table 6
                          Overpayments Recaptured Outside of Payment Recapture Audits
                                                    FY 2013
                                                  (in Millions)

                                                                                                                                Cumulative Amount
                            Amount Identified   Amount Recovered   Amount Identified   Amount Recovered   Cumulative Amount
   Agency Source                                                                                                                   Recovered
                                (CY)                 (CY)              (PYs)                (PYs)         Identified (CY+PYs)
                                                                                                                                   (CY+PYs)

Medicare FFS Error                                                                          $25.5
                                 $40.0               $33.2              $30.9                                   $70.9                 $58.7
Rate Measurement                                                                            Note 1

                                $14,204.6           $12,559.2          $24,882.9           $19,487.1
Medicare Contractors                                                                                          $39,087.5             $32,046.3
                                 Note 2              Note 2             Note 3              Note 3

Medicare Part C
                                   $0                  $0                $1.7                 $0                 $1.7                  $0
Note 4

Medicare Part D
                                   $0                  $0                $0.2                 $0                 $0.2                  $0
Note 4

Medicare Part C RADV                                                     $3.4                $3.4
                                  $5.0                $5.0                                                       $8.4                 $8.4
Audits                                                                  Note 5              Note 5

Medicaid Error Rate
                                                                         $3.5
Measurement                       $0.2                $0.7                                   $1.3                $3.7                 $2.0
                                                                        Note 6

CHIP Error Rate
                                                                         $0.3
Measurement                       $0.2                $0.2                                  $0.01                $0.5                 $0.21
                                                                        Note 6

Medicaid Integrity               $14.1                                                                          $22.2
Contractors-Federal                                   $2.6               $8.0                $1.8                                     $4.4
Share-FMAP rates                 Note 7                                                                         Note 7

Foster Care Eligibility
Reviews = Post-                   $1.1                $1.1              $16.8               $16.8               $17.9                 $17.9
Payment Reviews



Foster Care OIG                                                         $203.1                                  $207.1
                                  $4.0                $0.2                                  $102.7                                   $102.9
Reviews                                                                 Note 8                                  Note 8


Foster Care Single
                                  $0.5                $0.2              $34.4               $33.2               $34.9                 $33.4
Audits

Child Care-Single
                                  $2.0                $2.5               $4.9                $3.3                $6.9                 $5.8
Audit

Child Care-Error Rate                                                    $0.7
                                  $0.2                 $0                                     $0                 $0.9                  $0
Measurement                                                             Note 9

Head Start- OIG                                                          $5.1                $5.1
                                  $1.9                 $0                                                        $7.0                 $5.1
Reviews                                                                Note 10             Note 10

Head Start- Single
                                  $1.8                $0.8               $2.1                $3.5                $3.9                 $4.3
Audits




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 190
                                                                                                                                          OTHER INFORMATION



Notes:

  1. The Medicare FFS Error Rate Measurement’s Amount Recovered (PYs) amount of $27.2 million that was reported in the FY 2012 AFR was amended
         $25.5 million to exclude amounts that were later overturned on appeal.
  2. This total reflects amounts reported by the Medicare FFS Contractors excluding the amounts reported for the Medicare FFS recovery auditors program,
         which are reported in Table 3, and the Medicare FFS Error Rate Measurement program, which are reported separately in Table 7.
  3. This total reflects amounts reported by the Medicare FFS Contractors excluding the amounts reported for the Medicare FFS recovery auditors program,
         which are reported in Table 3, and the Medicare FFS Error Rate Measurement program, which are reported separately in Table 7. In addition, the
         Amount Identified (PYs) and Amount Recovered (PYs) amounts that were reported in the FYs 2011 and 2012 AFR were amended to remove amounts
         associated with the Medicare FFS Error Rate Measurement program and to reflect revisions made after the FY 2012 AFR publication date. The Amount
         Identified (PYs) information was changed from $24,913.9 million to $24,882.9 million, and the Amount Recovered (PYs) information was changed from $19,513.0
         million to $19,487.1 million.
  4.     These amounts represent money owed to HHS by health plans that terminated their Part C or Part D contracts.
  5.     The Medicare Part C RADV Audits Amount Identified (PYs) and Amount Recovered (PYs) columns were amended from $3.5 million, as reported in the
         FY 2012 AFR, to $3.4 million.
  6.     For the Medicaid and CHIP error rate measurements, the Amount Identified (PYs) information that was reported in the FY 2012 AFR was amended to
         exclude improper payments that were due to eligibility errors, which HHS and States are unable to recover. The Medicaid error rate measurement’s
         Amount Identified (PYs) was amended from $4.3 million to $3.5 million, while the CHIP error rate measurement’s Amount Identified (PYs) amount was
         amended from $0.5 million to $0.3 million.
  7.     For Medicaid, the Medicaid Integrity Contractors (MICs) identified total overpayments which include both the Federal and State shares. For the Amount
         Identified (CY) column, HHS has reported the actual Federal share across audits. For the Amount Identified (PYs) column, HHS applied FY 2012 State
         FMAP rates to estimate the Federal share of overpayments, although not all overpayments identified were based on FY 2012 paid claims. Lastly, adding
         the $14.1 million figure in the Amount Identified (CY) cell and the $8.0 million figure in the Amount Identified (PYs) cells produces $22.1 million, not the
         $22.2 million figure in the Cumulative Amount Identified (CY + PYs) cell, due to using rounded numbers in the table for presentation purposes.
  8.     The Foster Care OIG Reviews information that was published in the FY 2012 AFR contained $217.8 million in the Amount Identified (PYs) and
         Cumulative Amount Identified (CY+PY) columns. Theses prior year totals were amended to reflect the issuance in FY 2013 of revised sustained amounts
         associated with previously sustained audit report recommended disallowances (four from FY 2010 and one from FY 2011). The net impact of these
         changes reduced the totals for the Amounts Identified (PYs) and the Cumulative Amounts Identified (CY + PYs) columns by approximately $14.8 million.
  9.     The Child Care Error Rate Measurement information reflects overpayments that are identified through the statistical sampling process. The information
         reported represents the amount that is subject to disallowance. For the Child Care Error Rate Measurement Amount Recovered (CY) information, States
         are required to recover child care payments that are the result of fraud and have discretion as to whether to recover misspent funds that were not the
         result of fraud, such as in cases of administrative error.
  10.    In FY 2012 the amount reported for the Amount Identified (CY) and Amount Recovered (CY) columns was $0.3 million. However, this total did not reflect
         an additional $4.8 million that was also identified through OIG reviews and subsequently recovered. Therefore, the amount reported in FY 2013 as
         Amount Identified (PYs) and Amount Recovered (PYs) columns were amended to reflect the true total of $5.1 million.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 191
                                                                                                      OTHER INFORMATION




                              MANAGEMENT REPORT ON FINAL ACTION
                                           October 1, 2012 – September 30, 2013

Background

The Inspector General Act Amendments of 1988 require departments and agencies to report to Congress on the
actions they have taken and the amount of funds recovered or saved in response to OIG audit recommendations.
This annual management report provides the status of OIG A-133 audit reports (reports) in the Department and
summarizes the results of actions taken to implement OIG audit recommendations during the reporting period. As
part of the U.S. Chief Financial Officer Council’s Streamlining Effort of FY 1996, the Management Report on Final
Action has been incorporated in the AFR.

Four Key Elements to the HHS Audit Resolution and Follow-Up Process

  1. HHS OPDIVs have a lead responsibility for implementation and follow-up on OIG and independent auditor
     recommendations;
  2. The Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources establishes policy and monitors HHS OPDIVs’ compliance with
     audit follow-up requirements;
  3. The audit resolution process indicates the ability to appeal disallowances administratively under such
     programs as Head Start, Foster Care and Medicaid pursuant to the Departmental Grant Appeals Board’s
     regulations in 45 C.F.R. Part 16; and
  4. If necessary, the Conflict Resolution Council resolves conflicts between the HHS OPDIVs and OIG.


Status of Audits in the Department

In general, HHS OPDIVs have followed up on OIG recommendations effectively and within regulatory time limits.
HHS Agencies usually reach a management decision within the 6-month period that is prescribed by the Inspector
General Act Amendments of 1988 and OMB Circular A-50, Audit Follow-up. For the most part, they also complete
their final actions on reports, including collecting disallowed costs and carrying out corrective action plans, within a
reasonable amount of time. However, the Department continues to monitor this area to improve procedures and
ensure compliance with corrective action plans.

Departmental Conflict Resolution

In the event that HHS OPDIVs and OIG staff cannot resolve differences on specific report recommendations, a
conflict resolution mechanism is available. During FY 2013, there were no disagreements requiring the convening
of the Conflict Resolution Council.

Final Action Tables and Departmental Findings

Table 1, Management Action on Costs Disallowed in OIG Reports, presents costs that HHS challenged because a
grantee had violated a law, regulation, grant term or condition.

  • In FY 2013, HHS initiated Recovery Action, through collection, offset or other means, on 334 reports for a
    total of $767,400,888.



 Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 192
                                                                                                         OTHER INFORMATION



     • In FY 2013, HHS completed Recovery Action, through collection, offset or other means, on 300 reports for a
       total of $553,507,193.
E.      As of September 30, 2013, HHS identified 228 reports with outstanding balances over one year old totaling
        $2,019,398,540 . Forty-three percent of these accounts receivable are currently being pursued for collection.
        These accounts receivable are owed by state and local governments (132), hospital and medical related
        organizations (54), non-profit organizations (21), Indian tribes (19) and educational institutions (2). A detailed
        list of reports over one year old with outstanding balances to be collected can be found at:
        http://www.hhs.gov/asfr/of/finpollibrary/financialpolicies.html - Audit Guidance.


                                                              TABLE 1
                                 Management Action on Costs Disallowed in OIG Reports
                                                       As of September 30, 2013

                                                                                            Number        Disallowed Costs

        A. Reports for which final action had not been taken by the                           303          $ 2,357,574,840
           commencement of the reporting period. See Note 1.
        B. Reports on which management decisions were made during the                         334              767,400,888
           reporting period. See Note 2.

        Subtotal (A + B)                                                                      637          $ 3,124,975,728

        C.        Reports for which final action was taken during the reporting period:
                     i.   The dollar value of disallowed costs that was recovered             300              553,507,193
                          through collection, offset, property in lieu of cash, or
                          otherwise.

                    ii.   The dollar value of disallowed costs that were written off by          4                2,886,847
                          management.

        Subtotal (i + ii)                                                                     304          $ 556,394,040

        D. Reports for which no final action has been taken by the end of the                 333          $ 2,568,581,688
           reporting period. See Note 3.

        Notes:
             1.     Includes adjustments of amended disallowance and disallowance excluded from the previous
                    reporting period.
             2.     Represents the amount of management concurrence with the OIG’s recommendations. For this fiscal
                    year, the OIG’s reconciliation with the HHS Agencies showed a variance that represents only timing
                    differences between the OIG’s and the OPDIVs’ records.
             3.     In addition to current unresolved reports, this figure includes reports over one year old with
                    outstanding balances totaling $2,019,398,540 (e.g., audits under current collection schedule or audits
                    under administrative or judicial appeal).




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 193
                                                                                                       OTHER INFORMATION



Table 2, Management Action on OIG Reports with Recommendations that Funds Be Put to Better Use, appears
below. “Funds to be put to better use” relates to those costs associated with cost avoidances, budget savings, etc.
identified by the OIG.

  • In FY 2013, HHS initiated action on $821,434,473 in OIG recommendations to put funds to better use.
  • In FY 2013, HHS completed action on $149,503,974 in OIG recommendations to put funds to better use.


                                                         TABLE 2
                                       Management Action on OIG Reports
                              with Recommendations that Funds Be Put to Better Use
                                                  As of September 30, 2013

                                                                                        Number        Disallowed
                                                                                                      Costs

 A. Reports for which final action had not been taken by the commencement                    7         $ 439,029,967
    of the reporting period. See Note 1.

 B. Reports on which management decisions were made during the reporting                    30             821,434,473
    period.

 Subtotal (A + B)                                                                           37         $ 1,260,464,440

 C.        Reports for which final action was taken during the reporting period:
            i.       The dollar value of recommendations that were actually completed       24             149,503,974
                     based on management action or legislative action.

           ii.       The dollar value of recommendations that management has
                     subsequently concluded should not or could not be implemented
                     or completed.

 Subtotal (i + ii)                                                                          24         $ 149,503,974

 D. Reports for which no final action has been taken by the end of the                      13         $ 1,110,960,466
    reporting period.

 Notes:
      1.         Includes adjustments of amended disallowance and disallowance excluded from the previous reporting
                 period.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 194
                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION




 FY 2013 TOP MANAGEMENT AND PERFORMANCE CHALLENGES IDENTIFIED BY
                 OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL (OIG)




TO:                The Secretary                                     December 12, 2013
                   Through:            DS    ________
                                       COS   ________
                                       ES    ________

FROM:              Inspector General

SUBJECT:           Top Management and Performance Challenges Facing the Department of
                   Health and Human Services in Fiscal Year 2013

This memorandum transmits the Office of Inspector General’s (OIG) list of top management and performance
challenges facing the Department of Health and Human Services (the Department). The Reports Consolidation Act
of 2000, Public Law 106-531, requires OIG to identify these management challenges, assess the Department’s
progress in addressing each challenge, and submit this statement to the Department annually.

The OlG’s top management and performance challenges for fiscal year 2013 are:

  1)     Overseeing the Health Insurance Marketplaces
  2)     Transitioning to Value-Based Payments for Heath Care
  3)     Ensuring Appropriate Use of Prescription Drugs in Medicare and Medicaid
  4)     Protecting the Integrity of an Expanding Medicaid Program
  5)     Fighting Fraud and Waste in Medicare Parts A and B
  6)     Preventing Improper Payments and Fraud in Medicare Advantage
  7)     Ensuring Quality of Care in Nursing Facilities and Home- and Community-based Settings
  8)     Effectively Using Data and Technology to Protect Program Integrity
  9)     Protecting HHS Grants and Contract Funds from Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
  10)    Ensuring the Safety of Food, Drugs and Medical Devices

OIG looks forward to continuing to work with the Department to identify and implement strategies to protect the
integrity of the Department’s programs and the well-being of the beneficiaries of these programs. If you have any
questions or comments, please contact me, or your staff may contact Erin Bliss, Director of External Affairs, at
(202) 205-9523 or Erin.Bliss@oig.hhs.gov.


                                                    /Daniel R. Levinson/

                                                    Daniel R. Levinson




 Department of Health and Human Services                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 195
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



Management Challenge 1: Overseeing the Health Insurance Marketplaces

Why This Is a Challenge
The Health Insurance Marketplaces (Marketplaces), also known as the Health Insurance Exchanges, add a
substantial new dimension to the Department’s program landscape.

The Marketplaces include State, Federal, and Partnership Marketplaces, each of which must implement and
successfully operate a complex set of program requirements. Individuals use the Marketplaces to get information
about their health insurance options, be assessed for eligibility (for, among other things, qualified health plans,
premium tax credits, and cost sharing reductions), and enroll in the health plan of their choice. Sufficient
enrollment, including enrollment of relatively healthy individuals, is essential for producing a stable and effective
insurance market.

The Department faces significant challenges in several key areas, including eligibility systems, payment accuracy,
contractor oversight, and data security and consumer protection. Coordination among Federal and State agencies,
private insurers, and contractors is necessary to achieve program objectives and poses an additional challenge to
the Department.

Eligibility Systems. The Federally Facilitated Marketplace (FFM) operates via the Department’s healthcare.gov
website. Healthcare.gov also serves as a gateway for consumers to reach State-run Marketplaces. The Department
has acknowledged that it faces significant, well-publicized challenges in ensuring that healthcare.gov operates
successfully. These reported challenges include hardware and software issues. The Department must ensure that
healthcare.gov verifies consumers’ personal information; accurately determines eligibility for Marketplace
insurance, tax credits, and cost-sharing subsidies; operates effectively and easily for consumers; and transmits
complete, accurate, and timely information to insurers regarding enrollees. The Marketplaces must also
successfully facilitate Medicaid enrollment for those who qualify (see Challenge 4, Protecting the Integrity of an
Expanding Medicaid Program).

CMS operates and oversees the Data Services Hub (Hub), which allows for exchange of data between the
Marketplaces and Government databases to verify applicant eligibility, in coordination with partners at the Social
Security Administration, Internal Revenue Service (IRS), Department of Homeland Security, Department of Justice
(DOJ), and the States.

The Department must also be attentive to State Marketplace operations to ensure States’ compliance with
requirements, including requirements for making eligibility determinations and for transmitting accurate and
timely data used for purposes of Federal payments, such as determinations related to subsidies.

Contractor Oversight. Contractors have played, and will continue to play, a vital role in building, maintaining, and
fixing the systems that underpin the FFM. Early reports reflected that these systems, as constructed, did not
function as they were intended. The Department must ensure, to the greatest extent possible, that the
Government obtains specified products and services from its various contractors on time and within budget. The
Department faces a challenge to ensure proper management of, and payment under, the various contracts
entered into for implementation and operation of the FFM, including the Hub. This challenge is heightened by,
among other things, the large number of contracts and the need to coordinate work across multiple contractors.
For general information on challenges associated with contract administration, see Management Challenge 9.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 196
                                                                                                  OTHER INFORMATION



Payment Accuracy. Ensuring accurate payments related to the Marketplaces also poses a substantial management
challenge. The Department needs to implement financial management and payment systems to ensure accurate
and timely payments to insurers of advance premium tax credits, cost-sharing subsidies, and premium stabilization
payments. These payments involve complex calculations and offsets, adjustments, and reconciliations, which pose
challenges for making accurate payments. Monitoring and accounting for these payments can also be challenging.
In addition, some payments will rely on information obtained from private insurers. The Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS) will need to work closely with insurers to ensure that information is timely, complete, and
accurate. Given the amount of Federal funds involved, the Department should undertake a thorough risk
assessment and, where appropriate, develop error rates to measure the integrity of program payments.

Security. Effective operation of the Marketplaces requires rapid, accurate, and secure integration of data from
numerous Federal and State sources and individuals who use the Marketplaces. It requires means for real-time
communication among many Federal and State systems on a large scale. Because these systems handle
consumers’ sensitive personal information, security of data and systems is paramount. Where the Department
offers consumers alternate pathways for enrollment that do not require consumers to use healthcare.gov, such as
submitting paper applications or using a call center, the Department also must ensure that those pathways
incorporate effective security and eligibility safeguards and work well for consumers and insurers.

Another key responsibility is educating consumers about the Marketplaces and how to use them. It is also
important to educate consumers about protecting themselves from fraud schemes, such as identity theft, since
criminals often take advantage of new programs. Potential fraud schemes include identity thieves posing as
legitimate assisters offering to help individuals purchase insurance in exchange for money or personal identifying
information; imposters misleading Medicare beneficiaries into falsely believing they need to purchase new
insurance; and sham websites that appear to be legitimate. The Department must also ensure that navigators,
agents and brokers, and other assisters are qualified and properly trained to help consumers and provide reliable
information.

Progress in Addressing the Challenge
On December 1, 2013, the Administration reported significant improvement in the operations of healthcare.gov.
The report identified improvement on several system performance metrics, including response time, error rate,
system stability, and number of concurrent users.

With respect to the Hub, CMS obtained its necessary security authorization on September 6, 2013. OIG had
reviewed CMS’s implementation of security controls for the Hub from March through June 2013. CMS has
reported that all key steps that remained at the time of our review have since been completed.

CMS has issued regulations and guidance regarding numerous aspects of the Marketplaces and the related
subsidies and premium stabilization programs. This includes a final rule on program integrity provisions for the
Marketplaces and related programs intended to safeguard Federal funds and protect consumers. In addition to
these regulations, CMS reports providing technical assistance and other support to States regarding Marketplace
implementation.

The Department and Office of Inspector General (OIG) are working closely with Government partners, including
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), DOJ, and State Attorneys General, among others, to prevent and respond to
consumer fraud in connection with the Marketplaces. OIG and the Department have conducted consumer
education and outreach on how to protect oneself against fraud and identity theft. The FTC and States have
primary jurisdiction for responding to consumer fraud allegations, and OIG has updated the OIG fraud hotline to
seamlessly route consumer fraud complaints to the FTC, as well as routing consumer inquiries about the
Marketplaces to CMS.



 Department of Health and Human Services                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 197
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION




What Needs To Be Done
The Department must continue to upgrade and improve healthcare.gov, including both the front-facing consumer
functions, as well as the back-end administrative and financial management functions. The Department also must
ensure that alternate pathways for enrollment operate with integrity and that consumers’ personal information is
secure. The Department must ensure that issuers and consumers receive accurate enrollment and subsidy
information and that systems for paying insurers operate with sound safeguards and internal controls. States and
consumers must receive accurate information about potential Medicaid enrollment. Vigilant monitoring and
testing of the Marketplaces and rapid mitigation of identified vulnerabilities are essential.

The Department must address challenges in the short run to facilitate the ongoing open enrollment for 2014, when
most people will be required to have health insurance. In addition, where the Department uses temporary
mechanisms for the current enrollment period, the Department must develop permanent solutions that ensure
the smooth and successful operation of the Marketplaces for special enrollment periods, the 2015 open
enrollment period that is scheduled to start on November 15, 2014, and beyond. Moreover, the Department must
address full implementation of the online SHOP Exchange.

The Department must also complete its development and implementation of financial management and payment
systems and ensure that payments to insurers, which are scheduled to begin in January 2014, are accurate. While
in the near-term the Department faces immediate challenges related to healthcare.gov operations, eligibility
verification, payment accuracy, contracting, and security of data, the Department will face continuing challenges as
the program evolves over time. The Department will need to adjust its management and oversight approaches
accordingly to ensure that problems are prioritized and addressed. As with other new programs, the Department
must monitor for known fraud, waste, and abuse risks and detect emerging new risks to protect the Federal
investment in health care reform. If fraud schemes are identified, the Department must respond quickly and
effectively.

Further, the Department must continue to coordinate closely with States and with other Federal agencies to
monitor the operations and security of the Marketplaces and to implement the subsidies and other programs that
begin on January 1, 2014. OIG will monitor the implementation and operations of the Marketplaces and plans to
conduct oversight work initially focused on core risk areas, such as eligibility systems, payment accuracy, IT
security, and contracting. In particular, OIG will conduct an audit of safeguards to prevent the submission of
fraudulent or inaccurate information pursuant to the mandate at Public Law 113-46, Section 1001(c). OIG is
coordinating closely with its oversight partners at GAO, other IGs (such as the Treasury IG for Tax Administration),
and State auditors to develop complementary work and maximize the Government’s limited oversight resources.

Key OIG Resource
• OIG testimony on security controls for the data services hub, September 2013




 Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 198
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



Management Challenge 2: Transitioning to Value-Based Payments for Heath Care

Why This Is a Challenge
To secure the future of the public health care programs, the Department must be vigilant in reducing waste and
increasing value in health care. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) estimated that 20-30% of U.S. Health Spending
(public and private) in 2009—roughly $750 billion – was wasted. Other estimates suggest similar levels of waste.
Waste in health care programs is a multi-dimensional problem. The IOM report identified six major areas of waste:
unnecessary services, inefficient delivery of care, excess administrative costs, inflated prices, prevention failures,
and fraud. OIG work has identified waste in these areas; see also Management Challenges 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 for more
discussion on issues specific to prescription drugs, Medicaid, Medicare Parts A & B, Medicare Advantage (MA) and
quality of care.

There is widespread agreement among experts that the incentives created by paying for health care based on the
volume of items or services furnished, generally known as a fee-for-service system, contributes to waste in health
care by encouraging unnecessary utilization and fragmented, poor quality care. Moreover, poor quality care harms
beneficiaries and can result in additional costs; for example, OIG found that adverse events (i.e., patient harm
caused by care) for hospitalized Medicare beneficiaries cost over $4 billion in one year. For these and other
reasons, the Department is transitioning to value-based payments in Medicare and Medicaid intended to produce
higher quality care at lower costs, in part by rewarding high-quality care, penalizing low -quality care, or enhancing
care coordination. These models include, for example, value-based payments for hospitals, penalties for hospital
readmissions, pay-for-performance systems, shared savings programs, gainsharing, care coordination payments,
and bundled payments. These new models hold promise for improving health care delivery and efficiency; at the
same time, they present long-standing and new program-integrity challenges.

Aligning Incentives. In a complex health care system, designing payment mechanisms that encourage desired goals
(e.g., quality outcomes and cost efficiencies) while avoiding incentives that lead to unintended and undesirable
outcomes (e.g., overutilization or stinting on care) is a key challenge. This is a particular challenge for models that
use the traditional fee-for-service payment structure alongside, or in addition to, value-based payments, such as
the Medicare Shared Savings Program, which includes both fee-for-service payments and shared savings
payments. When considering such hybrid payment methodologies, it is important to carefully assess: (1) the
financial incentives that arise from each payment component, (2) new or different financial incentives that might
arise from their combination, and (3) the potential fraud, waste, and abuse risk areas corresponding to the
multiple types of payment. Longstanding program and enforcement experience illustrates that how Medicare and
Medicaid pay for services influences the types of misconduct that arise. For example, fee-for-service payments
raise the risk of overutilization and payment for unnecessary services; some risk-based or bundled payments may
reduce overutilization risks, but increase risks of underutilization or stinting on care. For models that are untested
for the Department and for providers under Medicare and Medicaid, it can be challenging to anticipate and
account for all of the potential impacts – both benefits and risks – of significant changes in payment methodology.

An additional challenge arises because certain initiatives could raise costs in one part of a program but lead to
greater savings elsewhere. For example, greater investments in chronic disease management could improve
patients’ overall health and reduce the need for expensive emergency care. Similarly, effective care coordination
across multiple programs – such as for individuals eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid -- is important not only
because of the potential for better patient care, but also because costs may increase for one program but decrease
under another. For example, increased use of personal care services (covered by Medicaid) may increase Medicaid
and therefore States’ costs while saving money for Medicare and the Federal Government by reducing or avoiding
hospitalizations. The Department needs to be mindful of these incentives when structuring cross-cutting care
coordination initiatives.



 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 199
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION



Program Design and Integrity. Designing, implementing, and overseeing many new and sometimes complex
payment models and demonstrations, combined with the complexity and scope of the Medicare and Medicaid
programs and evolving health care landscape, poses significant management and program integrity challenges.
Designing payments and programs with incentives in mind is essential, but it is only one facet. The Department
must track and coordinate new models to ensure effective administration and must be alert to issues that impact
more than one program, such as provider participation and beneficiary alignment. The Department must
continually review the underlying market and provider practice assumptions, including those related to quality, on
which payment structures and the resulting payments are based. The Department must be alert to new program
integrity risks that may emerge as a result of changing financial incentives and deploy appropriate program
integrity tools to prevent and detect fraud, waste, and abuse.

Getting value-based payment structures and rates right can be difficult. OIG work has illustrated the challenges in
structuring accurate bundled payments, which cover related services and/or products or an episode of care. For
example, OIG found that Medicare’s bundled payment for global surgery fees, which provides one fee for the
surgery and related pre- and post-surgical care, has not been adjusted to reflect evolving physician practices. As a
result, the payment model assumes more services than are typically provided, resulting in inflated payments.
Examples of other design and rate setting challenges include ensuring that payment bundles avoid creating
incentives and opportunities to furnish and bill for services outside the bundle to increase payments, that
providers participating in multiple incentive payment programs are not receiving duplicative incentive payments,
and that payment mechanisms encompassing services furnished across multiple provider settings work properly
and reimburse correctly.

Integrity of Information. When payments are linked to quality, outcomes, or performance, the Department must
ensure the reliability of underlying data. Many value-based payment mechanisms rely on complex data, electronic
health information, and sophisticated quality and performance measures. To ensure reliable results, data must be
accurate, complete, and timely. Measures must be appropriate and meaningful. Outcomes must be correctly
assessed to ensure correct payment. When quality or performance is determined on the basis of Medicare or
Medicaid claims billed, ensuring accurate and reliable claims information – and detecting improper claims -- is also
critical.

In addition, the data CMS provides to the industry must be accurate. For example, programs such as the Pioneer
Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Model, the Medicare Shared Savings Program (MSSP), and the Medicare fee
for service (FFS) Physician Feedback Program call for CMS to provide performance or clinical data to providers so
they can use it to improve the care they furnish. To be effective, the data must be correct, the metrics meaningful,
and the information usable.

In sum, the linkage between quality, performance, and payment presents new challenges for administering
Medicare and Medicaid payment systems.

Progress in Addressing the Challenge
The Department is continuing to implement value-based payment programs and develop new demonstration
programs. CMS recently reported positive initial results from the first year of the Pioneer ACO program – all ACOs
achieved quality goals, and 13 ACOs generated a total savings of $87.6 million, of which $33 million was returned
to the Medicare Trust Fund. In 2013, CMS began implementing the Bundled Payment for Care Improvement (BPCI)
Initiative, which includes four models testing different payment mechanisms that include quality and
accountability measurements. CMS continues to develop, implement, and test new value-based payment
structures.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 200
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



The Department has taken steps to foster integrity in these new programs, as illustrated by the regulations for the
MSSP and Participation Agreements for the BPCI Initiative, which incorporate various safeguards intended to
mitigate potential vulnerabilities. It is too early to assess the outcomes of these program integrity efforts, but
CMS’s attention to, and integration of, safeguards into the design of the MSSP and BPCI Initiative demonstrate a
focus on program integrity that should be replicated in all programs.

CMS has reported that it is developing management and tracking systems and procedures to support new value-
based payment structures and other new models. CMS also reports that it has established internal review
processes to promote the use of effective measurement strategies, to coordinate across components regarding
quality measurement, and to identify areas where beneficiaries are impacted by more than one value-based
payment initiative. CMS also provides technical assistance to participants in new models.

What Needs to be Done
The Department should continue to prioritize the effective transition to value-based payment mechanisms and the
development and refinement of quality, outcomes, and performance metrics. Data systems supporting programs
that link payment to quality and value must be scrutinized for timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. The
Department should continue to develop and maintain internal controls to ensure effective coordination among
value-based payment programs and to avoid duplicative payments and operational inefficiencies. The Department
must scrutinize bundled payments, shared savings programs, and other value-based payments to ensure that
payment methodologies are appropriate, payments are calculated accurately, and that performance-based
incentives are aligned with beneficial outcomes for Medicare, Medicaid, and patients. CMS should also continue its
efforts to provide technical assistance to participants in its demonstration and other value-based programs.

CMS should continue to strengthen its program integrity tools and apply them as needed to ensure integrity in
new models. In overseeing new models, the Department should monitor financial incentives to ensure that they
achieve quality and efficiency goals and do not result in undesirable outcomes. The Department’s oversight is
critical and must consider the full range of potential risks. For example, shared savings or bundled payments may
pose a heightened risk of stinting or underutilization compared to traditional fee-for-service payments, for which
the larger risk may be provision of unnecessary care or overly expensive care. Models that incorporate both types
of payments may raise both types of risks or different risks. CMS must continue to assess emerging fraud, waste,
and abuse risks in new models and, as necessary, develop and implement new tools to detect and prevent them.
Moreover, the Department should continue to monitor cost, quality, utilization, outcomes, and experience of care
and to disseminate lessons learned to improve new programs.

As demonstration programs continue to unfold, the Department should carefully monitor for successes and
benefits that can be scaled and replicated, as well as for potential problems -- including inefficiencies, misaligned
incentives, or abuses. The Department must rigorously evaluate results of demonstration programs and other new
value-based purchasing payment mechanisms. As with any innovation and experimentation, missteps may occur; it
is critical that the Department address missteps effectively and take appropriate actions to prevent their
recurrence.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 201
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



Management Challenge 3: Ensuring Appropriate Use of Prescription Drugs in Medicare and
Medicaid

Why This Is a Challenge
Ensuring the appropriate use of prescription drugs by Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries is vital for financial
reasons as well as patient safety and quality of care. In 2012, Medicare Part D provided prescription drug coverage
to more than 37 million beneficiaries at a cost of almost $67 billion. In 2010, Medicaid provided prescription drug
coverage to 28 million beneficiaries at a cost of $19 billion. The following are concerns about appropriate
prescribing and dispensing of drugs as well as deficiencies in the safeguards intended to protect beneficiaries and
the programs from drug overutilization, fraud, and abuse.

Prescription Drug Diversion and Abuse. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has characterized
prescription drug abuse as an epidemic, and in 2010, overdose of prescription painkillers was one of the leading
causes of accidental death in the United States. Prescription drug abuse is a serious and growing problem for
Medicare Part D and Medicaid – OIG’s investigations of abuses in this area have increased dramatically over the
past 5 years. Prescription drug diversion is a complex crime that involves many co-conspirators, ranging from
simple street traffickers to complex criminal enterprises of health care professionals, pharmacies, and even
patients. Fraud schemes bill Medicare and Medicaid for services and drugs that are unnecessary or never provided,
resulting in patient harm and financial loss to the program.

Prescription drug fraud and diversion often involve controlled drugs but can also include billing for unnecessary
non-controlled prescriptions. For example, an OIG investigation led to the conviction of a pharmacist who owned
26 pharmacies and used an elaborate web of physicians, pharmacists, and patient recruiters to fraudulently bill
Part D and Medicaid. This pharmacist paid kickbacks, bribes, and other inducements to physicians to write
unnecessary prescriptions for controlled drugs and expensive non-controlled drugs. The physicians directed their
patients to fill their prescriptions at 1 of the 26 pharmacies, which then billed Medicare and Medicaid for
unnecessary controlled substances it dispensed to the beneficiaries and for expensive non-controlled drugs that it
did not dispense.

Prescriber Qualifications. As a basic safeguard, prescription drugs must be prescribed in accordance with State law
by an appropriate medical professional to qualify for Part D reimbursement. This safeguard is not operating as
effectively as it should; Medicare Part D inappropriately paid $5.4 million in 2009 for 72,552 prescriptions written
by unauthorized prescribers, such as massage therapists, veterinarians, and athletic trainers. Medicare should
never pay for drugs ordered by unauthorized individuals.

Questionable Prescribing and Billing Patterns. OIG has identified questionable prescribing by hundreds of general-
care physicians. Some 736 physicians demonstrated extreme patterns of prescribing relative to their peers with
respect to: number of drugs prescribed per beneficiary; number of pharmacies filling their prescriptions;
percentages of expensive brand-name drugs; or percentages of Schedule II drugs like morphine and oxycodone,
which are more susceptible to abuse. In total, Medicare paid $352 million for Part D drugs ordered by questionable
prescribers in 2009.

In addition, OIG uncovered questionable billing patterns by 2,637 retail pharmacies nationwide with billing
patterns far outside the norm. These pharmacies billed extremely high numbers of drugs per beneficiary or per
prescriber or billed extremely high percentages of Schedule II or III drugs, brand-name drugs, or refills relative to
other pharmacies. In 2009, Medicare paid these pharmacies a total of $5.6 billion. It is important to note that while
these practices are not necessarily fraudulent they raise flags that warrant further attention.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 202
                                                                                                      OTHER INFORMATION



Schedule II Refills. Federal law requires an original prescription each time a Schedule II drug is dispensed;
nonetheless, OIG found that Medicare Part D inappropriately paid $25 million for Schedule II drugs billed as refills
in 2009. Part D plan sponsors should not have paid for Schedule II refills. Paying for refills of these addictive drugs
raises public health concerns and may contribute to the diverting of controlled substances. Three-quarters of Part
D plan sponsors paid for these refills, indicating that many do not have adequate controls in place.

Atypical Antipsychotic Drug Use In Nursing Homes. OIG has raised concerns about overmedication of Medicare
nursing home residents, particularly the use of atypical antipsychotic drugs for beneficiaries with dementia. More
than 20 percent of claims for atypical antipsychotic drugs for Medicare patients in nursing homes indicated a
failure to satisfy Federal standards that protect nursing home residents from unnecessary drug use. OIG also found
that nursing homes generally were not meeting all requirements for assessments and care plans for residents
receiving antipsychotics.

Ineffective Oversight of Part D Utilization. Part D plan sponsors and CMS’s Medicare Drug Integrity Contractor
(MEDIC) are key lines of defense in identifying and addressing drug overutilization, fraud, and abuse. However, OIG
found evidence that oversight is inconsistent across sponsors and may be lacking overall. Some plan sponsors did
not identify any potential fraud, waste, and abuse incidents; most potential fraud, waste, and abuse incidents were
associated with only a small number of plan sponsors. In addition, the MEDIC has not fully utilized data analytics to
identify potential fraud, waste, and abuse.

Progress In Addressing the Challenge
CMS has taken steps to strengthen oversight of appropriate drug utilization in Medicare Part D. For example, CMS
responded to a prior OIG recommendation by requiring that all Part D claims submitted to CMS include a valid
National Provider Identifier for the prescriber – this safeguard is one step toward ensuring and monitoring
appropriate prescribing. Plan sponsors are required to maintain compliance programs to help detect, prevent and
correct fraud, waste, and abuse. CMS also provided guidance and educational outreach to sponsors and providers
about the overutilization of prescription drugs, including support for State Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs.
Moreover, CMS has increased monitoring of prescribers through the Part D Recovery Audit Contractors (RACs),
which identify and recover Part D improper payments. CMS has also reported providing information and guidance
to sponsors about high risk pharmacies and prescribers to combat prescription drug diversion. In addition, CMS has
reported taking steps to redirect the MEDIC to focus more acutely on proactive data analysis.

CMS has also described its efforts to curb overprescribing by developing metrics at the beneficiary level that
trigger follow-up actions. If a beneficiary’s drug use exceeds certain clinical standards, this triggers a review of the
beneficiary’s medical management by his/her physician(s). If this review does not substantiate a clinical need for
the high utilization, the Part D plan will implement prior authorization reviews for that beneficiary’s claims.

In March 2012, CMS launched the National Partnership to Improve Dementia Care (the Partnership), aimed at
improving behavioral health and safeguarding nursing home residents from unnecessary antipsychotic drug use.
The Partnership set a goal to reduce antipsychotic drug use in nursing homes by 15 percent by the end of 2012,
and CMS reported a national drop in antipsychotic use of 11.4 percent by the second quarter of 2013. CMS also
provided guidance and training in May 2013 to assist surveyors in determining whether nursing homes are meeting
minimum standards of care governing antipsychotic drug use.

What Needs To Be Done
In addition to the steps described above, CMS must take further action to ensure that each claim for a prescription
contains both a valid identifier and authorized prescriber. Additionally, CMS should ensure that the MEDIC
routinely analyzes billing data to detect pharmacies and providers with extreme billing patterns. CMS should also
require that sponsors identify and refer potential fraud, waste, and abuse to CMS for further review. CMS must



 Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 203
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



also better ensure that Part D plans do not pay for prohibited refills of Schedule II drugs. In addition, CMS needs to
implement its plans described to OIG to develop predictive models and utilize data analytics that will target
aberrant billing patterns in the future.

OIG remains concerned that some instances of atypical antipsychotic drug use by nursing home residents may not
represent the best clinical care for the patients; in addition, inappropriate Part D payments for some of these
prescriptions may persist. CMS should facilitate access to information, like diagnosis codes, that are necessary to
ensure appropriate care and accurate coverage and reimbursement determinations.

Key OIG Resources
• Testimony of Deputy Inspectors General on Curbing Prescription Drug Abuse in Medicare. June 24, 2013
• Medicare Atypical Antipsychotic Drug Claims For Elderly Nursing Home Residents. May 2011



Management Challenge 4: Protecting the Integrity of an Expanding Medicaid Program

Why This Is a Challenge
In 2014, States have the option to expand Medicaid eligibility to qualifying adults earning up to 133 percent of the
Federal poverty level. In addition to the challenges in implementing this expansion, increases in the Medicaid
population and spending also heighten the urgency of addressing the program integrity challenges that Medicaid
already faces. These include reducing waste associated with excessive payment rates, avoiding or recovering
Medicaid improper payments and payments for which a third party is liable, and preventing fraud, waste, and
abuse in Medicaid managed care programs. (Other key challenges for Medicaid are addressed elsewhere –
prescription drug abuse in Management Challenge 3; vulnerabilities in nursing homes and home- and community-
based settings in Challenge 7; and limitations in the national Medicaid database in Challenge 8.)

Expansion of Medicaid Eligibility. For individuals who are “newly eligible” under the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
expanded income limits, the Federal Government will pay the full costs of their care through 2016; after which the
Federal share gradually falls to 90 percent by 2020 and continues at 90 percent thereafter. For other Medicaid
beneficiaries, the Federal Government will continue to share costs with States according to its standard Federal
Medical Assistance Percentage (FMAP), which ranges by State from 50 to 74 percent. These eligibility expansions
are expected to increase the number of Medicaid beneficiaries and Federal spending on Medicaid significantly.
Many individuals eligible for Medicaid will use the ACA created Marketplaces to enroll in Medicaid and thus the
Marketplaces must effectively facilitate that enrollment (see Challenge 1, Overseeing the Health Insurance
Marketplaces.)

Challenges involve the implementation of this expansion and the financial and internal controls needed to ensure
that the Federal Government pays the appropriate share of costs for each beneficiary depending on the criteria
under which he or she qualified for coverage. It may be challenging to apply Medicaid eligibility requirements
accurately, and to the extent that States miscategorize beneficiaries, the financial implications for the Federal and
State financial shares could be significant.

Problems Identifying and Recovering Improper Payments. OIG found that CMS Federal Medicaid Integrity
Contractors (MIC) had limited success identifying Medicaid overpayments. Review MICs initially identified over
113,000 providers with potential overpayments of $282 million, but after performing audits, the Audit MICs found
actual overpayments to only 25 of these providers, totaling less than $300,000. Likewise, 80 percent of the audits
that OIG reviewed either did not find an overpayment or were unlikely to find overpayments. OIG found similarly
limited results for Medicaid from the Medicare-Medicaid Data Match program (Medi-Medi Program). Of the total



 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 204
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



$46.2 million in expenditures recouped through the program during 2007 and 2008, more than three-quarters –
$34.9 million – was recouped for Medicare.

OIG has also found that longstanding challenges persist in recovering payments from third parties. Millions of
Medicaid beneficiaries have additional health insurance through third-party sources. If beneficiaries have another
insurance source, it should pay before Medicaid does, up to the extent of its liability. However, since 2001, States
have consistently reported challenges in getting third parties to provide complete coverage information and to
process or pay claims. As a result, as of 2011, $4 billion in claims remained at risk of not being recovered.

Program Integrity in Managed Care Programs. As of 2011, almost three-quarters of all Medicaid beneficiaries
were enrolled in some type of managed care system. The private plans and Medicaid share financial risk; fraud,
waste, and abuse by health care providers or beneficiaries drive up costs for both the plans and Medicaid. Fraud or
abuse by the managed care plan (e.g., manipulating its bids) can further increase Medicaid costs.

CMS’s guidelines identify six areas of fraud, waste, and abuse in Medicaid managed care: (1) managed care
contract procurement, (2) marketing and enrollment, (3) underutilization of services, (4) claims submission and
billing procedures, (5) fee-for-service payments within managed care, and (6) embezzlement and theft. OIG found
that the predominant concerns of both States and plans were provider fraud – billing for services that were not
provided, medically unnecessary, or upcoded – and beneficiary fraud including prescription drug abuse.

Excessive Payments to Public Providers. OIG has raised long-standing concerns about States’ Medicaid payment
rates to public providers. For example, we found that in 2009, New York Medicaid paid $2.27 billion ($1.13 billion
Federal share) to 15 State-run developmental centers. New York’s payments to these centers were not based on
actual costs. If New York had used actual costs in its rate-setting, Medicaid reimbursements to the developmental
centers could have been up to $1.41 billion lower that year, saving the Federal Government up to $701 million.

In some cases, the excess Medicaid payments are returned to the State and not retained by the facilities to provide
care to Medicaid beneficiaries. In essence, this can serve as a mechanism for States to use Federal Medicaid funds
to subsidize non-Medicaid costs.

Progress In Addressing the Challenge
CMS has reported that it is working to promote program integrity with respect to the Medicaid expansion by
providing tools and technical assistance to the States, developing new procedures and practices for ensuring
eligibility verification and payment accuracy, and training State staff on reporting and accounting for expenditures
associated with newly eligible individuals.

CMS has also reported actions to improve the MIC and Medi-Medi programs consistent with OIG
recommendations, such as assigning more Medicaid audits through the collaborative process, which showed
greater success than the traditional process. This progress includes assigning 516 collaborative audits in 32 States
as of August 2013. CMS is also reconfiguring its approach to Medicaid program integrity contractors, including
letting the Review MIC contracts expire. In the future, CMS expects to develop a Unified Program Integrity
Contractor model in which program integrity contractors will cover Medicare and Medicaid.

In addition, CMS stated that it will continue working with States and third parties to address problems identified by
States with identification and collection from liable third parties. CMS also stated that it will review existing
authorities to identify options for increased enforcement to deal with uncooperative third parties.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 205
                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION



In 2011, OIG reported that States and managed care plans were taking important steps to protect against fraud,
waste, and abuse. These included providing program integrity training to managed care plans’ staffs and to
providers in their networks. States conduct desk reviews of managed care plans’ compliance plans, and many
States also conducted onsite reviews. States also reported requiring managed care plans to disclose ownership and
control information. CMS is working to update guidelines to States on program integrity in Medicaid managed care
settings.

Finally, CMS is continuing to work with New York to revise its methodology for Medicaid payments to State-run
developmental centers to better align them with costs. In addition, CMS issued guidance on Medicaid upper
payment limits and is requiring all States to demonstrate annually the upper payment liability to the Federal
Government for services that are subject to these limits.

What Needs To Be Done
CMS should continue its efforts to develop robust oversight for the Medicaid expansion. CMS must be vigilant in
addressing program integrity risks associated with the expansion, including monitoring States’ compliance with
eligibility requirements and FMAP expenditures.

CMS should continue to build on its progress addressing MIC and Medi-Medi performance in identifying Medicaid
overpayments. In particular, CMS should expand its use of collaborative audits to ensure that all States and the
District of Columbia are actively engaged with the MICs in the identification and auditing of providers.

CMS should work with States to explore options to strengthen enforcement of third party liability. CMS could
facilitate a conversation with States about additional enforcement authorities at the State and Federal levels.

Given that concerns about identifying fraud and abuse remained among States and plans, particularly with respect
to provider and beneficiary fraud, CMS should update guidance to States to reflect these concerns. CMS should
work with States to ensure that contracts with managed care organizations contain adequate provisions for the
identification and referral of potential fraud cases.

OIG recommends that Medicaid payments to public providers be limited to the costs of providing services. In 2008,
CMS issued a final rule that, among other things, would limit Medicaid payments to public providers to their costs
of providing care, but the rule was ultimately vacated by Federal District Court. CMS should issue new regulations
to prevent excessive payments to public providers.

Key OIG Resources
• Office of Inspector General testimony on Medicaid overpayments to public providers. September 20, 2012
• Office of Inspector General testimony on Medicaid contractors. June 14 2012
• Medicaid Third-Party Liability Savings Increased, But Challenges Remain. January 2013
• Medicaid Managed Care: Fraud and Abuse Concerns Remain Despite Safeguards. December 2011




 Department of Health and Human Services                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 206
                                                                                                      OTHER INFORMATION



Management Challenge 5: Fighting Fraud and Waste in Medicare Parts A & B

Why This is a Challenge
While all fraud is waste, not all waste is fraud. Waste is inefficiency that may be, for example, a medically
unnecessary service, inefficient delivery of care, inflated prices, excess administrative costs, or prevention failures,
and as such, addressing it is a multi-dimensional problem. (For challenges related to maximizing value in health
care, see Management Challenge 2.) The Department must take necessary steps to address improper payments
and payment inefficiencies that waste Medicare dollars and divert finite resources away from beneficiary care and
services. In fiscal year (FY) 2013, CMS reported an error rate of 10.1 percent for Medicare Fee-for-Service. This
exceeds the 10-percent threshold set by the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010 (IPERA) and
is an increase from FY 2012.

Waste. OIG work has spotlighted various types of waste in Medicare Parts A and B:
• Hospital Billing Errors: Our reviews of hospital’s billing compliance have consistently found inappropriate
   claims for inpatient and outpatient services. Some of the most common problems include billing for short
   inpatient stays that should have been billed as outpatient or outpatient-with-observation services, transfers to
   other hospitals or post-acute care, incorrect diagnosis codes that result in higher payments, same-day
   discharges and readmissions, billing separately for services that should be bundled into the inpatient bill, and
   unreported credits from medical device manufacturers.
• Improper Payments to Skilled Nursing Facilities (SNFs): SNFs billed one-quarter of all claims in error in FY 2009,
   resulting in $1.5 billion in inappropriate Medicare payments. The majority of the claims in error were upcoded,
   i.e., the SNF reported a higher level of therapy than was provided, resulting in an inflated payment. In other
   cases, a SNF provided a higher level of therapy than the Medicare patient needed or could benefit from.
• Misaligned Payment Rates: OIG compared Medicare payments for 20 high-volume/high-expenditure lab tests
   to payments by State Medicaid and Federal Employees Health Benefit plans and found that Medicare paid
   between 18 and 30 percent more than other payers. Medicare could have saved up to $901 million in 2011 if
   it had paid providers at the lowest established rate in each geographic area. In another example, Medicare’s
   bundled payments for global surgery fees have not always been adjusted to reflect evolving physician
   practices; in certain instances, the OIG has found that fewer services are provided than assumed in Medicare’s
   payment model. Revising the payment methodology to more closely reflect the services typically provided in
   medical care today could result in more efficient provision of surgical services.

RACs are one important tool that CMS uses to identify and recover improper payments. In FYs 2010 and 2011,
RACs identified errors in half of all claims they reviewed, resulting in improper payments totaling more than $1
billion. CMS took corrective actions to address the majority of vulnerabilities identified by the RACs in FYs 2010 and
2011. However, CMS may not be taking full advantage of this tool, as it did not evaluate the effectiveness of its
corrective actions therefore, significant improper payments continue. In addition, CMS's RAC performance
evaluations did not include metrics to evaluate compliance with all contract requirements.

Fraud. Fraud is one significant cause of waste in Medicare, resulting in funds being paid for services or products
that were not rendered, were not medically necessary, or did not meet quality standards. Curbing fraud is vital to
conserving scarce health care resources and protecting beneficiaries, and the Department must continue to direct
all necessary resources toward fraud prevention, detection, and remediation. Adding to this challenge, fraud is a
crime of deception, and perpetrators design their schemes to make claims appear legitimate.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 207
                                                                                                  OTHER INFORMATION



Fraud schemes shift over time, but certain Medicare services have been consistent targets. OIG work has
consistently raised concerns about fraud in Medicare Parts A & B. For example, OIG investigations continue to
uncover durable medical equipment (DME) suppliers, home health agencies, community mental health centers,
ambulance operators, and outpatient therapy providers that are defrauding the Medicare program. In national
assessments, OIG has identified questionable billing patterns by home health agencies and community mental
health centers and is conducting similar analysis of questionable billing by ambulance providers.

CMS’s contractors play a key role in fighting Medicare fraud. However, there are indications that CMS is not
realizing the full potential of this oversight tool. In 2011, OIG found that four of the Zone Program Integrity
Contractors (ZPICs) did not identify any vulnerabilities related to home health, despite this being a source of
numerous fraud investigations and convictions at that time, and the ZPICs varied substantially in their efforts to
detect and deter fraud. Medicare also inappropriately paid some home health agencies with suspended or revoked
billing privileges. In another review, we found that only one of nine Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs)
performed activities to detect and deter fraud by community mental health centers (another provider type known
to have high risk for fraud) in 2010; most of these activities were part of a CMS-led special project. Other
contractors performed minimal activities to detect and deter fraudulent billing by community mental health
centers, despite having jurisdiction over fraud-prone areas. Additionally, Medicare paid community mental health
centers that did not comply with its requirements after their revocations were effective and while their
revocations were being processed.

Progress in Addressing the Challenge
The Department has made progress in its fight against fraud in Medicare Parts A & B. The Health Care Fraud
Prevention and Enforcement Action Team (HEAT) operations, including the Medicare Fraud Strike Force teams,
have demonstrated reductions in claims submitted to Medicare and payments made by Medicare for Part A & B
services susceptible to fraud, including DME suppliers, home health agencies, and community mental health
centers. Medicare Fraud Strike Force operations also have taken down ambulance and outpatient therapy fraud
schemes. Significantly, CMS for the first time used the provider enrollment moratoria authority granted by the
ACA. CMS instituted 6-month moratoria on the enrollment of new home health agencies in the Miami and Chicago
areas, and ambulance suppliers in the Houston area. CMS continues to use its payment suspension authority to
stop payments to certain providers and suppliers suspected of fraud. Another of CMS’s major tools in fraud
prevention is the Fraud Prevention System – this is discussed in Management Challenge 8.

CMS reported that it has improved its performance metrics for the ZPICs for all contracts that take effect in FY
2014. According to CMS, these new metrics will evaluate the contractors’ performance in critical program integrity
areas, including the accuracy and timeliness of implementing payment suspensions and revocations. CMS also
reported efforts to improve coordination between RACs and ZPICs. It added to the RAC Statement of Work a
requirement to meet with the ZPICs at least quarterly to discuss potential fraud referrals and trends they are
seeing in the applicable jurisdictions.

The Department has also made progress in combatting waste in Medicare Parts A & B. CMS issued a final rule to
implement its Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program, effective October 1, 2012, under which Medicare
payments may be reduced to applicable hospitals with high patient readmission rates. In that same final rule, CMS
also expanded its list of existing hospital-acquired conditions with some updated billing codes and added two new
conditions to this list. CMS also issued a final rule in August 2013 that modifies and clarifies review and payment
rules regarding inpatient hospital admissions and services under Parts A & B, which it expects will lower improper
payments in this problem area.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                           FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 208
                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION



In addition, the Department continues to implement the Competitive Bidding Program for DME, which holds
promise for addressing prior OIG findings that Medicare paid significantly more than market prices for many types
of DME. Regarding global surgery fees, CMS indicated that it will continue to work in conjunction with the
American Medical Association Relative Value Update Committee and relevant specialty societies to identify
potentially mis-valued services. CMS annually reviews hundreds of codes, many of which are codes with global
surgery periods. CMS also continues to monitor hospice claims at each MAC through inclusion of hospice as part of
their medical review strategies for the year.

What Needs to be Done
Fraud in Medicare Parts A & B remains a major challenge, and experience shows that schemes migrate among
provider and supplier types as well as geographically. The Department must improve its use of data and program
integrity tools to address shifting fraud schemes. For example, CMS should consider instituting additional
temporary enrollment moratoria for certain types of providers in geographic areas at significant risk for fraud.
Also, CMS should implement the surety bond requirement for home health agencies, and CMS should consider
increasing surety bond amounts above $50,000 for those home health agencies with high overall Medicare
payment amounts.

CMS should continue to build on its progress in addressing program integrity contractor performance and
oversight challenges, including developing additional performance evaluation metrics, particularly for high-risk
providers such as home health agencies and community mental health centers in fraud-prone areas. CMS also
should facilitate increased collaboration between RACs and program integrity contractors and provide training to
RACs to help them refer potential fraud, as appropriate.

More needs to be done to reduce improper payments. For instance, CMS should increase and expand reviews of
claims by SNFs and follow up with SNFs that billed in error. CMS should also address payment inefficiencies, such
as adjusting bundled payments for surgery fees, and should seek legislative fixes where necessary, for example, by
seeking legislative authority to reduce Medicare payments for lab tests.

Key OIG Resources
• Example of one of numerous hospital audits (North Shore Medical Center). March 2013
• OIG Spotlight on “Bad Bargains” (payment misalignments). August 2013
• OIG Spotlight on Skilled Nursing Facilities. February 2013
• Summary of Medicare Fraud Strike Force cases and accomplishments in OIG’s Semiannual Report to Congress,
    April 2013. (See pages 35-36)
• Selected OIG reports on CMS contractors – RAC oversight and actions to address improper payments, August
    2013; ZPICs’ and MACs’ oversight of home health. December 2012
• OIG report on questionable billing by community mental health centers. August 2012




 Department of Health and Human Services                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 209
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION



Management Challenge 6: Preventing Improper Payments and Fraud in Medicare Advantage

Why This is a Challenge
Improper payments to MA plans pose a significant vulnerability for CMS and cost taxpayers billions of dollars. In FY
2013, the Department reported an error rate of 9.5 percent for MA, corresponding to an estimate of almost $11.8
billion in improper payments (consisting of about $9.3 billion in overpayments and about $2.6 billion in
underpayments). The MA error rate measures errors related to risk-adjustment payments.

In general, Medicare makes capitated payments to MA organizations to deliver a specified set of health care
benefits to qualified beneficiaries. MA organizations submit bids to CMS related to their expected costs for the
upcoming year to calculate a standard monthly payment rate per beneficiary. This standard rate is then risk-
adjusted (increased or decreased) based on the health characteristics of individual enrolled beneficiaries; i.e.,
Medicare will make higher monthly payments on behalf of sicker beneficiaries. To calculate risk-adjustment
payments, MA organizations submit beneficiaries’ clinical diagnoses to CMS. If a diagnosis submitted is not
supported by the beneficiary’s medical record, the risk-adjustment will be inaccurate and result in payment errors.

OIG has audited risk-adjustment payments to MA organizations. In OIG audits of six MA organizations’ risk data
from payment year 2007, we identified approximately $650 million in aggregate extrapolated overpayments to
these plans because the medical records did not support the reported diagnosis.

Improper payments by MA organizations to providers (including those resulting from provider fraud) also raise
concerns. These improper payments are not measured or reported in the MA error rate because CMS does not
reimburse MA organizations on a claim-by-claim basis. However, such improper payments raise costs for MA
organizations, and in turn, raise costs for Medicare and beneficiaries.

MA organizations share risk with the Government and have incentives to detect and prevent fraud; however, not
all MA organizations have done so effectively. OIG found wide variability across MA organizations in their
identification and reporting of fraud and abuse incidents (ranging from 1 incident to 1.1 million incidents). In
addition, not all MA organizations took appropriate steps to respond to suspected fraud incidents.

Further, OIG found that from 2010 to 2011, CMS’s contractor charged with oversight of MA program integrity
(known as the MEDIC) produced limited results and faced significant barriers to effectively safeguarding this
program. For example, lack of a centralized MA data repository hindered the MEDIC’s ability to identify and
investigate MA fraud and abuse. The MEDIC also lacked administrative authority to recommend recoupment of
payments associated with inappropriate services.

Progress In Addressing the Challenge
CMS’s reported error rate for MA decreased from 11.4 percent for FY 2012 to 9.5 percent for FY 2013. CMS
described changes to its process for measuring MA payment errors in FY 2013 intended to ensure that the error
rate reflects MA organizations’ submissions of inaccurate diagnoses and not “false positives” associated with the
procedures for submitting medical record documentation. These changes included extending the time allotted for
MA organizations to submit medical records, providing interim feedback on the validity of those records, and
providing preliminary coding results to MA organizations.

CMS has reported that it is implementing three initiatives to reduce the errors in risk-adjustment data and
resulting improper payments. One is by contracting for audits of risk-adjustment data to verify the accuracy of
plan-reported diagnoses through medical record review and recouping improper payments identified by these
audits. CMS launched these audits in November 2013 and plans to audit about 30 MA contracts per year. The
second is conducting training for MA organizations about accurate diagnosis reporting, including identifying the



 Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 210
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



diagnoses most often resulting in errors. The third is educating physicians to improve their medical record
documentation in support of patient diagnoses.

Building on a model for identifying and collecting overpayments for Medicare Parts A & B, the ACA required CMS
to develop a RAC program for MA. CMS is working to implement this requirement.

CMS has updated its reporting requirements for the MEDIC to better oversee its performance in safeguarding MA
program integrity. CMS has reported that the MEDIC has access to a new data source, which facilitates analysis of a
large volume of data and increases data storage capacity. CMS expects that this will help the MEDIC perform
proactive analyses targeting MA fraud and abuse in the future.

What Needs to Be Done
CMS needs to ensure that MA organizations submit accurate beneficiary diagnoses for setting risk-adjustment
payments and recoup overpayments that were based on inaccurate data reported by plans. It should continue to
monitor the effectiveness of its initiatives aimed at this goal and take additional steps if error rates remain high.

CMS should also develop administrative mechanisms to recover or otherwise remedy overpayments that MA
organizations have made to providers so that these do not increase costs for Medicare. Implementation of the RAC
program in MA may provide such an opportunity.

CMS should work with MA organizations to ensure that they implement effective programs to detect, correct, and
prevent fraud, waste, and abuse, as required in their compliance plans. In addition, CMS should require MA
organizations to report suspected fraud incidents to the CMS and/or the MEDIC for further review and potential
referral to law enforcement. CMS should also develop a centralized repository of MA data, and provide access to
that repository to the MEDIC, to facilitate more effective program oversight. CMS should continue working to
ensure that the MEDIC successfully carries out proactive data analyses targeting MA fraud and abuse, as planned.

Key OIG Resources
• OIG audit of risk adjustment data (Excellus Health Plan, one of six audits). October 2012
• OIG report on MEDIC integrity activities in Parts C & D. January 2013
• OIG report on MA organizations’ identification of fraud and abuse. February 2012




 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 211
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



Management Challenge 7: Ensuring Quality of Care in Nursing Facilities and Home- and
Community-Based Settings

Why This Is a Challenge
As the median age of Americans continues to age and as more Americans live with chronic medical conditions, the
Department faces challenges in ensuring that beneficiaries who require nursing facility services receive high quality
care. It is also critical to ensure that appropriate home- and community-based care is available, allowing
beneficiaries whose needs and preferences are better served by remaining in their own homes or other
community-based settings to avoid institutionalization. Nursing facility and home- and community-based services
are important for individuals’ well-being and can often prevent the need for acute inpatient hospitalizations. OIG
work has uncovered various problems with nursing home care, including inadequate staffing, failure to provide
adequate nutrition and hydration, inadequate wound care resulting in pressure wounds (bedsores), inappropriate
medication practices, failure to develop adequate care plans, and excessive therapy services that are medically
unnecessary or even harmful to beneficiaries.

Medicaid is a major payer of personal care services, spending more than $12 billion annually. The Department is
committed to ensuring that Medicaid beneficiaries enjoy adequate home- and community- based care options and
as such, expenditures for personal care services may be expected to increase. Many Medicaid programs support
beneficiary-directed models for the delivery of personal care services. While these systems offer certain
advantages for promoting patient choice and preferences, OIG investigators have found such systems particularly
vulnerable to fraud and abuse.

Progress in Addressing the Challenge
The Department has taken steps to improve quality of nursing home and home- and community-based care. For
example, the Department has initiated a review of the requirements for nursing homes to participate in the
Medicare and Medicaid programs. This review promises to emphasize patient-centered care, quality improvement,
and preventable rehospitalization. The Department has long recognized problems with patients cycling between
nursing homes and acute care hospitals. As part of the Partnership for Patients Initiative, the Department
specifically committed $300 million towards a Community-Based Care Transition Program to improve patient
outcomes following hospital discharge. The Department has launched the National Nursing Home Quality Care
Collaborative that proposes to identify best practices from high performing facilities and promote dissemination
and replication of those practices to improve care. Increased involvement of Quality Improvement Organizations
also offers potential improvement in quality of nursing home care. Through its Nursing Home Compare initiative,
the Department also attempts to disseminate information about nursing home quality that may help inform
beneficiaries and their families when selecting facilities. In 2013, CMS also released guidance that strengthens
nursing home requirements in areas such as: the use of unnecessary medication, access and visitation, handling
linens and infection control, and the provision of basic life support services for residents.

OIG continues to pursue enforcement actions against nursing homes that render substandard care. CMS and OIG
continue to work closely with law enforcement partners at the Department of Justice and through the Federal
Elder Justice Interagency Working Group to promote better care for elderly persons and to prosecute providers
that subject them to abuse or neglect. Additionally, State Medicaid Fraud Control Units (MFCUs), which receive
oversight and funding from OIG, devote substantial resources to the investigation and prosecution of patient
abuse and neglect in both Medicaid-funded facilities and board and care facilities. The President’s FY 2014 Budget
includes a legislative proposal to expand MFCU jurisdiction to review patient abuse and neglect in home- and-
community based settings, as well.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 212
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION



The decision to force a nursing home to shut down or stop serving Federal health care program beneficiaries is
never taken lightly, as the experience of being transferred may be traumatic to displaced beneficiaries and locating
nearby facilities to adequately serve them can be challenging. Therefore, OIG invests substantial efforts in helping
facilities improve. OIG has developed an innovative quality-oriented corporate integrity agreement process to
work with facilities so they may properly serve beneficiaries. OIG has placed more than 750 nursing homes under
corporate integrity agreements that include quality-monitoring provisions designed to ensure that beneficiaries
receive the care they deserve.

Ensuring high quality home- and community-based services, enabling beneficiaries to avoid institutionalization,
relies heavily on appropriate personal care services. In another promising initiative, the Department funded the
National Direct Service Workforce Resource Center to develop the Road Map of Core Competencies for the Direct
Service Workforce. A planned component of this initiative is to develop nationally validated core competencies for
personal care service providers and reduce State variation. As OIG has previously noted, developing the standards
will be a good first step, but getting States to adopt them may require more forceful action from the Department.

What Needs To Be Done
The Department should continue to prioritize quality of nursing home and home- and community-based care. OIG
has offered recommendations that can assist the Department in this mission. For example, OIG suggested
enhancements to nursing home oversight to ensure that Medicare does not pay nursing homes to overmedicate or
otherwise inappropriately medicate beneficiaries (See Challenge 3 for more information). The Department should
also continue denying payments for services of such low quality that they are virtually worthless and work with
OIG to exclude providers that have rendered grossly substandard care, thereby preventing additional harm to
vulnerable beneficiaries.

The Department should ensure integrity of Medicaid-funded personal care services by establishing minimum
Federal qualification standards for providers, improving CMS’s and States’ ability to monitor billing and care
quality, and issuing operational guidance for claims documentation, beneficiary assessments, plans of care, and
supervision of attendants. The Department should also issue guidance to States regarding adequate prepayment
controls and help States access data necessary to identify overpayments. CMS should continue developing and
then implement its comprehensive action plan, including the input it gathered from the roundtable it held in April
2013 to consider feasible and effective practices for improving program integrity in personal care services.

Key OIG Resources
• Personal Care Services: Trends, Vulnerabilities, and Recommendations for Improvement. November 2012
• OIG Spotlight on Skilled Nursing Facilities. February 2013
• Example of Fraudulent Substandard Care: press release on nursing home operator health care fraud
    sentencing. August 2012




 Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 213
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



Management Challenge 8:                    Effectively Using Data and Technology to Protect Program
Integrity

Why This is a Challenge
The Department compiles an enormous amount of data related to Federal health insurance programs, public
health and human services, and the beneficiaries whom they serve. It continues to face challenges in effectively
using these data to detect and prevent improper payments and to ensure consumer and patient safety and quality
of care. It also faces challenges to protect the privacy and security of the data it collects and maintains.

Improving the Effectiveness of Medicaid Data. Federal Medicaid payments are expected to increase an average of
8 percent each year from 2013 through 2023, according to recent Congressional Budget Office estimates. As
Medicaid expands, it is imperative that CMS have a functional, national Medicaid database so that CMS may
monitor Medicaid payments and services. OIG work has found that the current national Medicaid data are not
complete, accurate, or timely and that additional data are needed to conduct national Medicaid program integrity
activities. OIG has recommended several actions for improvement, including that CMS establish a deadline for
when national Medicaid data of sufficient completeness and quality will be available and ensure that States submit
required data. CMS has attempted to improve the access and quality of Medicaid data, most recently through the
Transformed Medicaid Statistical Information System (T-MSIS) initiative. Although implementation is still early,
analysis completed in January 2013 showed that T-MSIS has made limited progress in addressing Medicaid data
concerns. (For additional information on challenges related to Medicaid, see Challenge 4).

Demonstrating Impact from the Fraud Prevention System (FPS). As the Department continues to implement
predictive analytics technologies to help identify fraudulent claims before they are paid, it must produce reliable
information demonstrating the effectiveness of these technologies. The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 required
CMS to use predictive analytics to identify and prevent the payment of improper claims in the Medicare fee-for-
service program. In response, CMS implemented the FPS in 2011 and now uses the predictive analytics program to
identify potential health care fraud, waste, and abuse. However, after its first year of implementation, challenges
remain in demonstrating the FPS’s impact. OIG found that some reporting requirements were not met and that its
methodology for calculating estimates on savings, recoveries, and return on investment included some invalid
assumptions that may have affected the accuracy of those amounts.

Ensuring HHS Data and Systems Are Secure. All information collected, processed, transmitted, stored, or
disseminated by HHS agencies, their contractors, States, and hospitals must be adequately protected pursuant to
the Privacy Act, Office of Management and Budget (OMB) guidelines, and other authorities. OIG has identified
vulnerabilities in a variety of information systems controls, including implementation of directives and guidance on
information security controls, access controls, and configuration management controls, which may lead to
unauthorized access to and disclosure of sensitive information or disruption of critical operations and limit the
ability to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of critical information and systems. As discussed in
Challenge 1, the Department also faces challenges in the development of systems for and effective operation of
the Marketplaces, which require rapid, accurate, and secure integration of data from numerous Federal and State
sources and individuals who use the Marketplaces.

Protecting Information Contained in Electronic Health Records (EHR) and Guarding Against Fraud. With the
enactment of the Recovery Act and the HITECH Act, the Department has played a leading role in the nationwide
adoption of EHRs and other health IT. These innovations offer opportunities for improved patient care and more
efficient practice management. However, as the volume of electronically-stored medical information grows,
protecting the privacy, security, and integrity of EHRs has become more critical. Data security breaches and



 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 214
                                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



medical identity theft are growing concerns, with thousands of cases reported each year. 17 The Department faces
challenges as it maximizes implementation of promising health IT while maintaining the privacy and security of
sensitive health information.

Experts in health information technology caution that use of EHRs can make it easier to commit fraud. In the
Department’s efforts to promote EHR adoption, it focused largely on developing criteria, defining meaningful use,
and administering incentive payments. It has given less attention to the risks EHRs may pose to program integrity.
Certain features, such as cut-and-paste and auto-fill templates may be used to mask true authorship of the medical
record and distort information to inflate health care claims. An examination of hospitals that received Medicare
incentive payments as of March 2012 revealed that while nearly all hospitals had recommended audit functions in
place, they may not be using them to their full extent. For example, nearly half of hospitals reported being able to
turn off audit logs, and few hospitals report using audit logs to identify potentially fraudulent or abusive practices.

Progress in Addressing the Challenge
CMS has taken action to improve its data and technology capabilities. Beginning in 2012, CMS partnered with 12
volunteer States on the planning and development of T-MSIS. OIG found that the 12 States had made some
progress in implementing T-MSIS. CMS stated that all States are expected to participate in T-MSIS by the end of
2013 and to demonstrate operational readiness to submit timely T-MSIS data by July 1, 2014. CMS issued a letter
to State Medicaid Directors in August 2013 that included a deadline for when all States are expected to
demonstrate operational readiness to submit T-MSIS files, transition to T-MSIS, and submit timely T-MSIS data.
CMS also reports that it has added terms and conditions to various Medicaid funding mechanisms to provide
incentive for States to report timely, complete and accurate data. CMS created a set of tools to help States prepare
to submit T-MSIS data, including establishing a CMS liaison for States and the creation of a T-MSIS State
collaboration workgroup.

In implementing FPS in July 2011, CMS met legislative timeline requirements and implemented the largest scale
predictive analytics program used to identify potential health care fraud, waste, and abuse ever developed. With
regard to demonstrating the impact of FPS, CMS has shown leadership by coordinating and leveraging
relationships with public and private entities to discern best practices for measuring the impact of program
integrity activities. CMS has also continued to take steps to refine its methodologies for calculating cost savings
from costs avoided due to FPS.

Some HHS agencies, States, and hospitals have made progress in addressing recommendations made by OIG in
audits of information security systems. However, CMS continues to have significant deficiencies in its planning,
implementation, and execution of its overall information security directives and guidance; and implementing
controls to prevent unauthorized access to sensitive information.

Through its EHR adoption incentive programs regulations and its EHR certification criteria regulations, HHS has
addressed privacy and security matters in limited ways. The Office of the National Coordinator for Health IT (ONC),
which coordinates the adoption, implementation, and exchange of EHRs, awarded a contract to develop




17
  CMS tracks nearly 300,000 compromised Medicare-beneficiary numbers. The Office for Civil Rights has received more than 77,000
complaints regarding breaches of health information privacy and completed more than 27,000 investigations, which have resulted in more than
18,000 corrective actions.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 215
                                                                                                   OTHER INFORMATION



recommendations to enhance data protection; increase data validity, accuracy, and integrity; and strengthen fraud
protection in EHR technology; however, the Department did not directly address all recommended safeguards
through certification criteria and meaningful use requirements. CMS has acknowledged the potential for EHRs to
be used to commit fraud and intends to develop guidelines to ensure appropriate use of the copy/paste feature in
EHRs. Additionally, CMS audits providers who received EHR incentive payments to gauge the accuracy of, among
other things, attestations that risk analyses designed to protect electronic health information were conducted. If
the Department takes steps to that ensure meaningful use requirements include necessary safeguards, these
audits may be a helpful oversight tool.

What Needs To Be Done
CMS and the 12 volunteer States participating in T-MSIS have made some progress, particularly toward planning
for T-MSIS implementation. However, early implementation outcomes raised questions about the completeness
and accuracy of T-MSIS data upon national implementation. CMS should continue to work with States to ensure
the submission of complete, accurate, and timely data. It should also establish a deadline for when T-MSIS data will
be available for use. If States fail to begin submitting T-MSIS data by the implementation deadline, CMS should use
its statutory enforcement mechanisms or seek legislative authority to employ alternative tools to compel State
participation.

To ensure effective operations during the planned expansion and enhancement of FPS over the next few years,
CMS will need to address FPS’s reporting and measurement vulnerabilities. OIG will continue monitoring the FPS
and analyze future modifications or refinements to it.

The Department, States, and hospitals should continue improving systems controls to help ensure that system
assets are protected from unauthorized usage and that only authorized personnel are granted access to data and
programs.

The Department should continue to focus on oversight and enforcement of privacy and security protections to
ensure that sensitive data are protected. It should also do more to ensure that EHRs contain safeguards and that
providers use these safeguards to protect against health care fraud involving electronic systems. The Department
should also provide additional guidance on information technology security standards and best practices that the
health care industry should adopt for EHRs.

Key OIG Resources
• Not All Recommended Fraud Safeguards Have Been Implemented in Hospital EHR Technology. December
    2013
• Early Outcomes Show Limited Progress for the T-MSIS. September 2013
• The Department and CMS Financial Statement Reports which can be found on the HHS website after December
    16, 2013. Fiscal Year 2013
• Security Gaps May Threaten Electronic Health Records. June 2011
• Protect Yourself Against Medical Identity Theft.
• CMS Response to Breaches and Medical Identity Theft. October 2012
• OIG report on implementation predictive analytics. September 2012




 Department of Health and Human Services                                            FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 216
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



Management Challenge 9: Protecting HHS Grants and Contract Funds from Fraud, Waste, and
Abuse

Why This Is a Challenge
HHS is the largest grant-making organization in the Federal Government, and its funding of health and human
services programs touches the lives of almost all Americans. In FY 2012, the Department awarded over 81,000
grants totaling approximately $347 billion. Of these, approximately 80,000 grants totaling approximately $90
billion were for programs other than Medicare or Medicaid. According to HHS’s Tracking Accountability in
Government Grants System, in FY 2013, HHS issued over 20,000 new awards totaling over $272 million. These
grants include those added to the HHS grant portfolio by the ACA and the Recovery Act, thus expanding the
oversight responsibilities of grant managers and project officers.

HHS is also the third largest contracting agency in the Federal Government; in FY 2013, HHS awarded over $19
billion in contracts across all program areas. Under ACA, contractors have played, and will continue to play, a vital
role in building, maintaining, and fixing the computer systems that underpin the implementation of Marketplaces
and the Data Hub. HHS faces a challenge to ensure proper management and oversight of these contracts. (See
Challenge 1 for more information on ACA contractor management and oversight.) Additionally, several HHS
Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) funded Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) grants and contracts. In calendar year 2012, HHS spent $755 million for grants and contracts in
these programs. In contracts alone, HHS awarded $13 million in SBIR contracts and $463,000 in STTR contracts in
FY 2013. HHS is the second largest payer under the SBIR and STTR programs (the Department of Defense is the
first).

The size and scope of departmental awards make their operating effectiveness crucial to the success of programs
designed to improve the health and well-being of the public. Yet OIG has noted weaknesses in the oversight of
grantees, as demonstrated by late or absent financial and related reports, insufficient documentation on progress
toward meeting program goals, and failure to ensure that grantees obtain required annual financial audits.

At the grantee level, a common problem uncovered by our reviews is that grantees lack robust financial
management systems. Some grantees cannot even account for specific grants on a grant-by-grant basis. Without
this basic ability, grantees cannot account for costs associated with specific grant awards. Accountability suffers as
a result. Collectively, when combined with frequent significant findings of unallowable expenses, these conditions
suggest the need for more purposeful oversight and consistency in oversight processes.

Additionally, OMB is in the process of finalizing extensive revisions to the grants management circulars and
associated cost principles for Federal grant awards, which will result in implementation challenges for the
Department, including changes to HHS regulations and potential adjustments to some grant oversight practices.

With respect to contracts, OIG raised concerns about HHS’s use of appropriations to fund contracts as well as its
efforts to monitor contractor performance. OIG audits of NIH contracts revealed instances of improper funding in
11 of 18 contracts. Follow-up audit work is underway to assess the effectiveness of the remedial actions outlined
by the Department in its 2011 report of Antideficiency Act violations.

OIG has also identified weaknesses in contracting processes and contract management. An audit of CDC contracts
revealed that CDC failed to meet Government requirements for contractor performance assessments. Failure to
conduct these assessments and make contractor evaluations available through the Federal Awardee Performance
and Integrity Information System (FAPIIS) deprives CDC’s and other agencies’ contracting officers of valuable
performance information that should be used in determining whether a contractor is responsible and should
receive another Federal award. During FY 2013 the Department focused on contractor performance assessments


 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 217
                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION



and posting performance information in the FAPIIS, resulting in an overall improvement from 7.91% (baseline FY
2009 – FY 2012) to 14.88% (FY 2009 – FY 2013).

With respect to misconduct involving grants or contracts, HHS faces various challenges pursuing criminal, civil or
administrative actions. While HHS has established a suspension and debarment program, in FY 2013, the
implementation of this tool to impose suspensions and debarments remains limited. HHS faces the challenge of
educating its grant and contract officers on these administrative remedies and encouraging their use.

Progress in Addressing the Challenge
HHS is strengthening its program integrity efforts by working with its OPDIVs and Staff Divisions (STAFFDIVs) to
implement a uniform risk management approach. The Department has established a Program Integrity
Coordinating Council to look across programs for common challenges and solutions. Additionally, HHS has actively
participated in the Government-wide grants reform guidance project, and is in the process of updating its own
internal grants administration manual to foster greater program integrity, accountability, and transparency
throughout the grants lifecycle.

With respect to systemic contract funding problems, the Department continues to provide its contracting
workforce with an online reference tool for contract funding, formation, and appropriations law compliance. The
Department conducts appropriations law compliance reviews of all contract actions exceeding $5 million or $10
million, depending on the type of requirement reviewed and the awarding OPDIV or STAFFDIV. HHS has also
revised its contract funding guidance to more accurately describe appropriations law and policy; these revisions
incorporated best practices and lessons learned. All Heads of Contracting Activities have developed guidance for
their contracting workforce on contractor performance evaluation.

With respect to grant and contract misconduct, the Department has participated in training related to fraud, waste
and abuse in the grant and contract area. OIG, a member of the President's Financial Fraud Enforcement Task
Force Grant Fraud Subcommittee, collaborated to produce guidance to be used by all Federal agencies as a
framework for grant training to reduce grant fraud risk and has offered to assist the Department in developing
training specific to HHS OPDIVs.

In outreach efforts, OIG provided fraud, waste, and abuse training to SBIR/STTR program staff in multiple OPDIVs
and to staff at CMS’s Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation. OIG created an Intranet Web Page for HHS
OPDIV officials to use to refer allegations of fraud or to submit questions about fraud to OIG.

With respect to suspension and debarment, the Suspension and Debarment Official (SDO) and her staff continue to
have monthly coordination meetings with OIG, the Office of Research Integrity and the Office of the General
Counsel. The SDO is also developing procedures and tools to assist HHS grants and contracts officials.

What Needs To Be Done
Sustained focus by the Department is needed to address vulnerabilities in its grant programs and contract
administration. With respect to grant oversight, OPDIVs need continued vigilance in monitoring grant resources
stemming from the ACA, the Recovery Act, and other grant programs. Implementation of planned program
integrity initiatives, such as evaluating and mitigating risks, identifying and addressing cross-cutting issues,
resolving grantee audit findings, and sharing best practices across the Department will better position HHS to
integrate program integrity into all aspects of its operations and culture.




 Department of Health and Human Services                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 218
                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION



OIG is continuing to examine grants management practices across the Department. For example, OIG is reviewing
the extent to which OPDIVs mitigate grantee risks and share information about high risk grantees. We are also
reviewing OPDIVs’ oversight of the SBIR program as it pertains to ensuring grantee compliance with program
eligibility requirements.

With respect to contract funding, the Department has advised that it is focused on preventing new violations and
that it is taking legally appropriate actions to ensure that there are no further violations of the Antideficiency Act
among ongoing contracts. OIG continues to recommend that the Department correct the improper funding of
contracts that resulted in appropriations violations and continue to ensure that appropriate officials attend
mandated training, that future contracts are funded properly, and that policy guidance is consistently followed.

The Department and OIG should continue to provide training on identifying and pursuing misconduct in HHS grants
and contracts. The Department also needs to continue to refine its Suspension and Debarment Procedures,
including streamlining the referral and decision process, setting up a department-wide tracking system, training
officials throughout the Department on suspension and debarment, and decreasing the processing time of
suspension and debarment referrals.

Key OIG Resources
• OIG Spotlight on Grants Management and Oversight. February 2013
• OIG review of CDC’s contract monitoring. July 2013




Management Challenge 10: Ensuring the Safety of Food, Drugs and Medical Devices

Why This Is a Challenge
The Department, through the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), is responsible for protecting public health by
ensuring the safety, efficacy, and security of drugs, medical devices, biologicals, and much of our Nation’s food
supply. The Department must ensure that once a drug, biologic, or device has been approved for use, it is
marketed appropriately. During a food emergency, the Department is also responsible for finding the
contamination source and overseeing the removal by manufacturers of these products from the market. However,
OIG work has revealed weaknesses in FDA's ability to adequately oversee the safety of drugs, biologics, medical
devices, and food. These challenges include:

Limited oversight of drug safety. A fall 2012 nationwide meningitis outbreak caused by contaminated injections
raised major concerns about the use of drugs supplied by compounding pharmacies. OIG reviewed hospitals’ use
of compounded drugs and found that in 2012, 92 percent of hospitals used compounded sterile preparations
(CSPs). Additionally, we found that 56 percent of hospitals made changes or planned to make changes to CSP
sourcing practices in response to the fall 2012 meningitis outbreak. In recent congressional hearings about
vulnerabilities in the oversight of compounding pharmacies, FDA has raised concerns that its enforcement
authority might not be sufficient to take action against inappropriate compounding practices.

Similarly, OIG’s review of Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies (REMS) raised concerns about FDA’s monitoring
of the risks associated with drugs that have known or potential risks that may outweigh the drugs’ benefits. REMS
are enforceable, structured plans to manage specific risks associated with these drugs. We found that nearly half
of sponsor assessments for the REMS we reviewed did not include all information requested in FDA assessment
plans. Moreover, FDA does not have the authority to take enforcement actions against drug sponsors that do not
include all information requested in FDA assessment plans.



 Department of Health and Human Services                                             FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 219
                                                                                                     OTHER INFORMATION



Inadequate food facility and dietary supplement manufacturer recordkeeping. In the past, OIG have found that
food facilities' failure to comply with FDA's recordkeeping requirements impedes the Department's ability to
ensure the safety of the Nation's food supply. OIG found that 59 percent of selected food facilities did not comply
with FDA's recordkeeping requirements. In recent reviews of manufacturers of dietary supplements, OIG found
that 28 percent of contacted companies failed to register with FDA as required. Of the companies that did register,
72 percent failed to provide the complete and accurate information required in the registry.

Potentially misleading claims made by manufacturers of dietary supplements. The Government Accountability
Office (GAO) and public interest groups have raised concerns about a specific type of claim called a
structure/function claim that manufacturers may use on dietary supplement labels. Manufacturers have used
these claims to promote health benefits of their products. Stakeholders have urged FDA to strengthen oversight of
these claims because they are potentially misleading and may lack scientific support. Manufacturers must have
competent and reliable scientific evidence to show that claims are truthful and not misleading, but they do not
have to submit the substantiation to FDA, and FDA has only voluntary standards for it. A manufacturer must notify
FDA when it uses structure/function claims. OIG found that substantiation documents for the supplements
reviewed were inconsistent with FDA guidance on competent and reliable scientific evidence. OIG also found that
FDA could not readily determine whether manufacturers had submitted the required notification for their claims.
These results raise questions about the extent to which structure/function claims are truthful and not misleading.

Ensuring Compliance With Marketing Requirements. Manufacturers of drugs, biologicals, and medical devices gain
approval for sale of their products for specific uses once FDA determines that the products are safe and effective
for those uses. Once approved for sale, qualified medical providers may prescribe them for any uses on the basis of
their medical judgment. However, manufacturers are prohibited from promoting products for uses for which FDA
has not specifically approved them (known as off-label uses). OIG, in conjunction with its law enforcement
partners, including FDA's Office of Criminal Investigations, has investigated many instances in which manufacturers
illegally promoted products for off-label uses. Off-label promotion can undermine the system intended to ensure
that drugs are safe and effective and can put patients at risk. Additionally, this illegal off-label promotion may lead
to fraudulent claims for payment submitted to Federal health care programs, including Medicare and Medicaid.
FDA faces ongoing challenges in adequately monitoring and preventing illegal off-label promotional activities.

Progress in Addressing the Challenge
Since September 2009, FDA has required food facilities to report to a new registry all instances when there is a
reasonable probability that a food might cause serious adverse health consequences and to investigate the causes
of any adulteration reported if the adulteration may have originated with the food facility. The Food Safety
Modernization Act (FSMA), signed into law in January 2011, provides FDA important new authorities to better
protect the Nation’s food supply. OIG will continue to oversee the Department’s management of food safety issues
and FSMA implementation.

The Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA), enacted in July 2012, expands the FDA’s
authorities and strengthens its ability to safeguard public health by authorizing the collection of user fees to fund
reviews of drugs and devices; promoting innovation to expedite the development and review of certain new drugs;
increasing stakeholder involvement in FDA decision making; and enhancing the safety of the drug supply chain.
FDA has established a 3-year plan to implement these provisions, and the agency’s progress is updated monthly on
a website.

OIG is continuing to work with law enforcement partners to investigate and prosecute drug and device
manufacturers that engage in illegal activity. This year, as in past years, the Government entered several
settlements with drug and device manufacturers relating to alleged off-label promotion. For example, in December



 Department of Health and Human Services                                              FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 220
                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION



2012, Amgen Inc. agreed to pay a total of $762 million to resolve allegations of off-label promotion and other
improper conduct. Amgen pled guilty to misdemeanor misbranding charges, entered a civil settlement agreement,
and entered a comprehensive corporate integrity agreement with OIG to resolve its criminal, civil, and
administrative liability for the improper conduct. In July 2013, TranS1, a medical device manufacturer, agreed to
pay $6 million to resolve allegations under the False Claims Act that it caused false claims to be submitted to
Medicare and Medicaid by, among other things, promoting its medical device for uses not approved or cleared by
the FDA.

FDA has made progress in addressing OIG recommendations. For example, as a result of OIG’s identifying
vulnerabilities in FDA’s oversight of regulatory decisions, FDA implemented new operating procedures for resolving
scientific disagreements. However, other concerns raised by our office, such as weaknesses in ensuring the
adequate monitoring of adverse-event reporting for medical devices and the accuracy of FDA’s National Drug Code
Directory, remain unaddressed.

What Needs To Be Done
The Department and FDA will need to continue issuing the rules and guidance documents necessary to fully
implement the various provisions in FDASIA. In addition, FDA will need to continue its efforts to fully implement
FSMA to better protect the Nation’s food supply. FSMA addresses many of OIG's recommendations; however, we
continue to recommend that FDA vigorously use its new authorities to remedy identified weaknesses in its
inspections and recall procedures. FDA should also ensure that States properly conduct contracted food facility
inspections. The Department also needs to focus on eliminating off-label promotion to protect patients and HHS
health care programs.

Key OIG Resources
• OIG reports on food facility safety inspections (December 2011), structure/function claims by dietary
    supplements (October 2012), Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies for drug safety (February 2013), and
    hospital outsourcing of high-risk compounded drugs (April 2013)
• DOJ press release: resolution with Amgen, Inc. settlement. December 19, 2012
• DOJ press release: resolution with TranS1, INC. July 3, 2013




 Department of Health and Human Services                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 221
                                                                                                      OTHER INFORMATION




           DEPARTMENT’S RESPONSE TO OIG TOP MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES




To:                 Daniel R. Levinson, Inspector General


From:               Ellen G. Murray, Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources and Chief Financial Officer


Subject:            FY 2013 Top Management and Performance Challenges Identified by the Office of Inspector
                    General (OIG)


On December 12, 2013, the Department received the OIG’s report, Fiscal Year 2013 Top Management and
Performance Challenges Identified by Office of Inspector General. The report, which is published annually in the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Agency Financial Report (AFR), provides an OIG assessment of
major Agency management and performance challenges during the most recent fiscal year that pose significant
risks related to waste, fraud, error, or mismanagement. This memorandum is in response to the OIG’s Report.

We concur with OIG’s findings concerning HHS top management and performance challenges, which include
Transitioning to Value-Based Payments for Heath Care; Overseeing the Health Insurance Marketplaces; Ensuring
Appropriate Use of Prescription Drugs in Medicare and Medicaid; Protecting the Integrity of an Expanding
Medicaid Program; Fighting Fraud and Waste in Medicare Parts A & B; Preventing Improper Payments and Fraud in
Medicare Advantage; Ensuring Quality of Care in Nursing Facilities and Home- and Community-based Settings;
Effectively Using Data and Technology to Protect Program Integrity; Protecting HHS Grants and Contract Funds
from Fraud, Waste, and Abuse; and Ensuring the Safety of Food, Drugs and Medical Devices. Our management is
committed to working toward resolving these challenges and looks forward to continued collaboration with OIG to
improve the health and well-being of the American people through these efforts.

We appreciate the cooperation and work conducted by OIG in helping us to continue to address the Department’s
major management and performance challenges. Many thanks to you and your staff for your continued
commitment in helping us improve our management environment.




/Ellen G. Murray/

Ellen G. Murray
Assistant Secretary for Financial Resources and
Chief Financial Officer
December 16, 2013



 Department of Health and Human Services                                               FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 222
                                                                                                                    OTHER INFORMATION




                                                                GLOSSARY


 ACRONYM                DESCRIPTION                                    ACRONYM                 DESCRIPTION

 AA………………………..Associate of Arts                                        ASPR…………………….Office of the Assistant Secretary for
                                                                                    Preparedness and Response
 ACA…...………………..Affordable Care Act
                                                                       ATSDR .................... Agency for Toxic Substances and
 ACF ........................ Administration for Children and
                                                                                                  Disease Registry
                              Families
                                                                       BA………………………..Bachelor of Arts
 ACL ......................... Administration for Community Living
                                                                       BHPr ...................... Bureau of Health Professions
 ACO ........................ Accountable Care Organization
                                                                       BPCI……………………..Bundled Payment Care Improvement
 ACR…………………….. Administrative Cost Review
                                                                       CAP ........................ Corrective Action Plan
 AFR ........................ Agency Financial Report
                                                                       CAUTI…………………..Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract
 AHRQ .................... Agency for Healthcare Research and
                                                                                     Infections
                           Quality
                                                                       CBO……………………..Congressional Budget Office
 AICPA…………………. American Institute of Certified Public
               Accountants                                             CBRs…………………….Comparative Billing Reports

 AIDD ....................... Administration for Intellectual and      CCDF ...................... Child Care Development Fund
                              Development Disabilities
                                                                       CFBNP…………………. Center for Faith-Based and
 AIDS ....................... Acquired Immune Deficiency                             Neighborhood Partnerships
                              Syndrome
                                                                       CDC ........................ Centers for Disease Control and
 ALJ……………………….Administrative Law Judge                                                              Prevention

 AoA ........................ Administration on Aging                  CERT ...................... Comprehensive Error Rate Testing

 ARRA…………………….American Recovery and                                    CFBNP.................... Center for Faith-Based and
              Reinvestment Act of 2009                                                           Neighborhood Partnerships

 ASA………………………Office of the Assistant Secretary for                     CFO ........................ Chief Financial Officer
             Administration
                                                                       CFRS ...................... Consolidated Financial Reporting
 ASC………………………Ambulatory Surgical Center                                                            System

 ASFR ……………………Office of the Assistant Secretary for                    CHIP ....................... Children’s Health Insurance Program
              Financial Resources
                                                                       CHIPRA .................. Children’s Health Insurance Program
 ASL……………………… Office of the Assistant Secretary for                                              Reauthorization Act of 2009
              Legislation
                                                                       CIO……………………...Chief Information Officer
 ASPA…………………… Office of the Assistant Secretary for
              Public Affairs                                           CISO…………………….Chief Information Security Officer

 ASPE…………………….Office of the Assistant Secretary for                    CLABSI………………….Central Line-associated Bloodstream
              Planning and Evaluation                                                Infections




Department of Health and Human Services                                                          FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 223
                                                                                                                  OTHER INFORMATION



 ACRONYM                   DESCRIPTION                           ACRONYM                  DESCRIPTION

 CLASS…………………..Community Living Assistance                       ERRP……………………. Early Retiree Reinsurance Program
               Services and Support
                                                                 EHR ........................ Electronic Health Records
 CME……………………. Continuing Medical Education
              Credits                                            ESRD ...................... End-Stage Renal Disease

 CMMI ..................... Center for Medicare and Medicaid     FAPIIS…………………. Federal Awardee Performance and
                            Innovation                                          Integrity Information System

 CMP ....................... Civil Monetary Penalties            FASAB .................... Federal Accounting Standards
                                                                                            Advisory Board
 CMS........................ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
                             Services                            FBIS........................ Financial Business Intelligence
                                                                                              System
 CO-OP .................... Consumer Operated and Oriented
                            Plan                                 FBWT ..................... Fund Balance with Treasury

 COLA ...................... Cost of Living Adjustment           FCA ....................... False Claims Act

 COTS……………………Commercial Off the Shelf                            FCRA ...................... Federal Credit Reform Act

 CPI ......................... Consumer Price Index              FDA ........................ Food and Drug Administration

 CPIM ...................... Consumer Price Index-Medical        FECA ..................... Federal Employees’ Compensation
                                                                                            Act
 CRADA.................... Cooperative Research and
                           Development Agreement                 FERS....................... Federal Employees’ Retirement
                                                                                             System
 CSPs…………………….Compounded Sterile Preparations
                                                                 FETP………………….…Field Epidemiology Training Program
 CSRS ....................... Civil Service Retirement System
                                                                 FFM……………………. Federally Facilitated Marketplace
 CUSP…………………….Comprehensive Unit-based Safety
              Program                                            FFMIA .................... Federal Financial Management
                                                                                            Improvement Act of 1996
 CY ........................... Current Year
                                                                 FFS ......................... Fee-for-Service
 DAB…………………….. Departmental Appeals Board
                                                                 FICA ...................... Federal Insurance Contributions Act
 DHS ........................ Department of Homeland Security
                                                                 FIFO ...................... First-in/first-out
 DIR……………………… Direct and Indirect Remuneration
                                                                 FISMA .................... Federal Information Security
 DMDC…………………. DOD’s Manpower Date Center                                                    Management Act of 2002

 DME ....................... Durable Medical Equipment           FMFIA .................... Federal Managers’ Financial
                                                                                            Integrity Act of 1982
 DOD……………………. Department of Defense
                                                                 FPS ......................... Fraud Prevention System
 DOJ......................... Department of Justice
                                                                 FSMA ..................... Food Safety Modernization Act
 DOL ........................ Department of Labor
                                                                 FMAP ..................... Federal Medical Assistance
 DRA……………………..Deficit Reduction Act of 2005                                                 Percentage




Department of Health and Human Services                                                     FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 224
                                                                                                               OTHER INFORMATION



 ACRONYM                    DESCRIPTION                           ACRONYM                 DESCRIPTION

 FTC………………………Federal Trade Commission                             H5N1 ..................... Avian Influenza

 FY ........................... Fiscal Year                       IBNR ...................... Incurred But Not Reported

 GAAP ...................... Generally Accepted Accounting        IEA………………………. Office of Intergovernmental and
                             Principles                                         External Affairs

 GAO…………………….Government Accountability Office                     IEVS ...................... Income Eligibility Verification System

 GDP ........................ Gross Domestic Product              IG……………………….. Inspector General

 GMRA..................... Government Management Reform           IHS ......................... Indian Health Service
                           Act of 1994
                                                                  IP……………………….. Improper Payments
 GPAM…………………. Grants Policy Administration Manual
                                                                  IPERA ..................... Improper Payments Elimination and
 GPRA ..................... Government Performance and                                        Recovery Act of 2010
                            Results Act of 1993
                                                                  IPERIA…………………. Improper Payments Elimination and
 GSA ........................ General Services Administration                    Recovery Improvement Act of 2013

 GTEx…………………….Genotype-Tissue Expression                          IPIA ....................... Improper Payments Information Act
                                                                                               of 2002
 HAIs……………………. Healthcare-Associated Infections
                                                                  IRS……………………… Internal Revenue Service
 HEAT ...................... Health Care Fraud Prevention and
                             Enforcement Action Team              IT ........................... Information Technology

 HEW ...................... Department of Health, Education       LIS ......................... Low-Income Subsidy
                            and Welfare (now HHS)
                                                                  LLP ......................... Limited Liability Partnership
 HFPP…………………….Healthcare Fraud Prevention
              Partnership                                         LPR……………………... Legal Permanent Resident

 HHS ....................... Department of Health and Human       MA ......................... Medicare Advantage or Part C
                             Services
                                                                  MACs ..................... Medicare Administrative
 HI .......................... Hospital Insurance                                            Contractors

 HIGLAS .................. Healthcare Integrated General          MARx ..................... Medicare Advantage Prescription
                           Ledger Accounting System                                          Drug

 HIPAA ..................... Health Insurance Portability and     MD&A.................... Management’s Discussion and
                             Accountability Act of 1996                                    Analysis

 HITECH .................. Health Information Technology for      MEDIC ................... Medicare Drug Integrity Contractors
                           Economic and Clinical Health Act
                                                                  MFCUs………………..Medicaid Fraud Control Units
 HIV ......................... Human Immunodeficiency Virus
                                                                  MIC ........................ Medical Integrity Contractors
 HPSA ...................... Health Professional Shortage Areas
                                                                  MII……………………… Medicaid Integrity Institute
 HRSA ..................... Health Resources and Services
                                                                  MLN……………………. Medicare Learning Network
                            Administration




Department of Health and Human Services                                                     FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 225
                                                                                                                OTHER INFORMATION



 ACRONYM                  DESCRIPTION                              ACRONYM                   DESCRIPTION

 MMA ...................... Medicare Prescription Drug,            OMHA ................... Office of Medicare Hearings and
                            Improvement and Modernization Act                               Appeals
                            of 2003
                                                                   ONC ...................... Office of the National Coordinator
 MMIS .................... Medicaid Management Information                                    for Health Information Technology
                           Systems
                                                                   OPD ....................... Orphan Products Development
 MPD ...................... Medicare Prescription Drug or Part D
                                                                   OPDIV .................... Operating Division
 MPE ....................... MARx Payment Error
                                                                   OS ......................... Office of the Secretary
 MSIS ...................... Medicaid Statistical Information
                             Systems                               PARIS ..................... Public Assistance Reporting
                                                                                               Information System
 MSP……………………. Medicare Secondary Payer
                                                                   PCMH .................... Patient Centered Medical Home
 MSSP ...................... Medicare Shared Saving Program
                                                                   PDE ....................... Prescription Drug Event
 N/A ........................ Not Applicable
                                                                   PEDIR………………….Payment Error related to Direct and
 NBS ........................ NIH Business Systems                               Indirect Remuneration

 NDC……………………..National Drug Code                                   PELS ....................... Payment Error related to Low-
                                                                                                Income Subsidy Status
 NDNH ..................... National Directory of New Hires
                                                                   PEMS ..................... Payment Error related to Medicaid
 NHSC ...................... National Health Service Corps                                    Status

 NHSN…………………..National Healthcare Safety Network                   PEPV ...................... Prescription Drug Event Data
                                                                                               Validation
 NIH ........................ National Institutes of Health
                                                                   PERM ..................... Payment Error Rate Measurement
 OAA……………………..Title III Older Americans Act
                                                                   PHS ........................ Public Health Service
 OACT……………………Office of the Actuary
                                                                   PII .......................... Program Integrity Initiative
 OASDI ..................... Old-Age Survivors and Disability
                             Insurance                             PIP ......................... Program Improvement Plan

 OASH……………………Office of the Assistant Secretary for                 P.L.......................... Public Law
             Health
                                                                   PNS ........................ Projects of National Significance
 OCR ........................ Office for Civil Rights
                                                                   PP&E………………….. Property, Plant and Equipment
 OGA……………………..Office of Global Affairs
                                                                   PRRB ...................... Provider Reimbursement Review
 OGC ....................... Office of the General Counsel                                     Board

 OI………………………...Other Information                                   PSC ........................ Program Support Center

 OIG ......................... Office of Inspector General         PUR........................ Period Under Review

 OMB ...................... Office of Management and Budget        PY .......................... Prior Year

                                                                   QIO ........................ Quality Improvement Organization



Department of Health and Human Services                                                         FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 226
                                                                                                                 OTHER INFORMATION



 ACRONYM                  DESCRIPTION                               ACRONYM                 DESCRIPTION

 QRIS ....................... Quality Rating and Improvement        SIR………………………. Standardized Infection Ratios
                              Systems
                                                                    SMI ....................... Supplementary Medical Insurance
 RAC ........................ Recovery Audit Contractor
                                                                    SNAP……………………Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
 RADV ...................... Risk Adjustment Data Validation                     Program

                                                                    SNF…………………….. Skilled Nursing Facility

 REMS……………………Risk Evaluation and Mitigation                         SNS ....................... Strategic National Stockpile
             Strategies
                                                                    SOSI ...................... Statement of Social Insurance
 RDS………………………Retiree Drug Subsidy
                                                                    SSA ....................... Social Security Administration
 RMFOB………………..Risk Management and Financial
              Oversight Board                                       SSF ......................... Service and Supply Funds

 RSI .......................... Required Supplementary              STAFFDIV ............... Staff Division
                                Information
                                                                    STTR ...................... Small Business Technology Transfer
 RSSI ........................ Required Supplementary
                                                                    TANF ...................... Temporary Assistance for Needy
                               Stewardship Information
                                                                                                Families
 SAMHSA ................ Substance Abuse and Mental Health
                                                                    T-MSIS ................... Transformed Medical Shared Saving
                         Services Administration
                                                                                               Program
 SBIR ........................ Small Business Innovation Research
                                                                    Treasury ................ Department of the Treasury
 SBR………………………Statement of Budgetary Resources
                                                                    UFMS ..................... Unified Financial Management
 SCSIA ...................... Statement of Changes in Social                                   System
                              Insurance Amounts
                                                                    U.S. ....................... United States
 SDO……………………..Suspension and Debarment Official
                                                                    U.S.C…………………….U.S. Code
 SE ........................... Salmonella Enteritidis
                                                                    USDA……………………U.S. Department of Agriculture
 SECA ...................... Self Employment Contribution Act of
                                                                    USSGL………………….U.S. Standard General Ledger
                             1954
                                                                    VA………………………..Department of Veterans Affairs
 SF……………………….Standard Form
                                                                    VFC ....................... Vaccines for Children
 SFFAS ..................... Statement of Federal Financial
                             Accounting Standards
                                                                    VICP ....................... Vaccine Injury Compensation
                                                                                                 Program
 SGR………………………Sustainable Growth Rate
                                                                    ZPIC ....................... Zone Program Integrity Contractor
 SHOP……………………Small Business Health Options
             Program




Department of Health and Human Services                                                        FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 227
                                                                                                            OTHER INFORMATION




                                   LAWS, REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE

LONG TITLE (each title is linked to an                                                                   SHORT TITLE
                                            AVAILABLE AT:
official government source)

Office of Management and Budget                                                                          OMB

Public Law                                                                                               P.L.

United States Code                                                                                       U.S.C.


Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of        http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                           P.L. 107-289
2002                                        107publ289/pdf/PLAW-107publ289.pdf

Affordable Care Act of 2010                 http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                           P.L. 111-148
                                            111publ148/pdf/PLAW-111publ148.pdf
                                                                                                         and
                                            http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                           P.L. 111-152
                                            111publ152/pdf/PLAW-111publ152.pdf

American Recovery and Reinvestment          http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                           P.L. 111-5
Act of 2009 (ARRA or Recovery Act)          111publ5/pdf/PLAW-111publ5.pdf

Anti-Deficiency Act (§ 1341, 1342, 1349-    http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title3       31 U.S.C. Ch 13
1351 and 1511-1519)                         1/subtitle2/chapter13&edition=prelim

Audit Follow-Up                             http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars_a050/                OMB Circular A-50

Budget Control Act of 2011                  http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                           P.L. 112-25
                                            112publ25/pdf/PLAW-112publ25.pdf

Cash Management Improvement Act of          http://www.fms.treas.gov/cmia/statute.html                   P.L. 102-589
1990, as amended

Chief Financial Officer (CFO) Act of 1990   http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/npr/library/misc/cfo.html     P.L. 101-576

Children’s Health Insurance Program         https://www.cms.gov/HealthInsReformforConsume/Dow            P.L. 111-3
Reauthorization Act of 2009 (CHIPRA)        nloads/CHIPRA.pdf

Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996                   http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                           P.L. 104-106
                                            104publ106/pdf/PLAW-104publ106.pdf

Community Living Assistance Services        http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                           P.L. 111-148, § 8001
and Support (CLASS) Act                     111publ148/pdf/PLAW-111publ148.pdf

Computer Security Act of 1987               https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/100/hr145/text        P.L. 100-235

Debt Collection Improvement Act of          http://www.dol.gov/ocfo/media/regs/DCIA.pdf                  P.L. 104–134
1996

Department of Defense and Full-Year         http://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/112/hr1473/text        P.L. 112-10
Continuing Appropriations Act of 2011

Department of Education Organization        http://history.nih.gov/research/downloads/PL96-88.pdf        P.L. 96-88
Act of 1979



 Department of Health and Human Services                                                     FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 228
                                                                                                         OTHER INFORMATION




Economy Act                                http://www.loc.gov/rr/frd/Military_Law/pdf/FLD_2013_C      31 U.S.C. Ch 15 § 1535
                                           h6.pdf

Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990          http://www.fms.treas.gov/ussgl/creditreform/fcratoc.htm    P.L. 101-508 § 500
(FCRA)                                     l

Federal Employees’ Compensation Act        http://www.dol.gov/owcp/dfec/regs/statutes/feca.htm        5 U.S.C. 751
of 1916 (FECA)

Federal Financial Assistance               http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 106-107
Management Improvement Act of 1999         106publ107/pdf/PLAW-106publ107.pdf

Federal Financial Management               http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 104-208
Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA)            104publ208/pdf/PLAW-104publ208.pdf

Federal Information Security               http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 107-347
Management Act of 2002 (FISMA - Title      107publ347/pdf/PLAW-107publ347.pdf
III of the E-Government Act of 2002)

Federal Insurance Contributions Act        http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/granule/USCODE-2011-              26 U.S.C. Ch 21
(FICA)                                     title26/USCODE-2011-title26-subtitleC-chap21/content-
                                           detail.html

Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity      http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/financial_fmfia1982          P.L. 97-255
Act of 1982

Federal Records Act of 1950                http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=%22federal+rec      44 U.S.C. Ch 31 § 3101
                                           ords+act+of+1950%22&f=treesort&fq=true&num=2&hl=tr
                                           ue&edition=prelim&granuleId=USC-prelim-title44-
                                           section3603

Financial Management Systems               http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/asse     OMB Circular A-127
                                           ts/omb/circulars/a127/a127.html

Financial Reporting Requirements           http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/asse     OMB Circular A-136
                                           ts/omb/circulars/a136/a136_revised_2012.pdf

Food, Drug, Cosmetic Act                   http://library.clerk.house.gov/reference-                  P.L. 59-384
                                           files/PPL_Title21_FoodDrugCosmeticAct.pdf

Freedom of Information Act of 1974         http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=freedom+of+inf      P.L. 93-502 or
                                           ormation+act&f=treesort&fq=true&num=1&hl=true&editi        5 U.S.C. Ch 5 §552
                                           on=prelim&granuleId=USC-prelim-title5-section552

Government Management Reform Act           http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-                        P.L. 103-356
of 1994                                    103s2170enr/pdf/BILLS-103s2170enr.pdf

Government Paperwork Elimination Act       http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 105-277 § 1701
of 1998                                    105publ277/pdf/PLAW-105publ277.pdf

Government Performance and Results         http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/mgmt-gpra/gplaw2m            P.L. 103-62
Act of 1993

Government Performance and Results         http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 111-352
Modernization Act of 2010                  111publ352/pdf/PLAW-111publ352.pdf

Health Care and Education                  http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 111-152




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 229
                                                                                                         OTHER INFORMATION



Reconciliation Act of 2010                 111publ152/pdf/PLAW-111publ152.pdf


Health Insurance Portability and           http://library.clerk.house.gov/reference-                  P.L. 104-191
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)         files/PPL_HIPAA_HealthInsurancePortabilityAccountability
                                           Act_1996.pdf

Healthy-Hunger Free Kids Act               http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 111-296
                                           111publ296/pdf/PLAW-111publ296.pdf

Improper Payments Elimination and          http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 111-204
Recovery Act (IPERA) of 2010               111publ204/pdf/PLAW-111publ204.pdf

Improper Payments Information Act of       http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 107-300
2002                                       107publ300/pdf/PLAW-107publ300.pdf

Inspector General Act Amendments of        http://uscodebeta.house.gov/view.xhtml;jsessionid=6271     P.L. 100-504 or
1988                                       31C92BBAA4188DA1AC4484416C65?req=granuleid%3AU             44 U.S.C. Ch 39
                                           SC-prelim-title44-
                                           chapter39&saved=%7CZ3JhbnVsZWlkOlVTQy1wcmVsaW0
                                           tdGl0bGU0NC1zZWN0aW9uMzkwMQ%3D%3D%7C%7C%
                                           7C0%7Cfalse%7Cprelim&edition=prelim

Internal Revenue Service Restructuring     http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 105-206
and Reform Act of 1998                     105publ206/html/PLAW-105publ206.htm

Management of Federal Information          http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars_a130               OMB Circular A-130
Resources

Management of Federal Information          http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/asse     OMB Circular A-127
Resources                                  ts/omb/circulars/a127/a127.html

Management's Responsibility for            http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/asse     OMB Circular A-123
Internal Control                           ts/omb/circulars/a123/a123_rev.pdf

Medicare Prescription Drug,                http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 108-173
Improvement and Modernization Act of       108publ173/pdf/PLAW-108publ173.pdf
2003 (a.k.a. Medicare Modernization
Act, or MMA)

Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation   http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 112-96
Act of 2012                                112publ96/pdf/PLAW-112publ96.pdf

Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1993         http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-                        P.L. 103-66
                                           103hr2264enr/pdf/BILLS-103hr2264enr.pdf

Orphan Drug Act, as amended                http://history.nih.gov/research/downloads/PL97-414.pdf     P.L. 97-414

Paperwork Reduction Reauthorization        http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 104-13
Act of 1995                                104publ13/pdf/PLAW-104publ13.pdf

Patient Protection and Affordable Care     http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                         P.L. 111-148
Act of 2010                                111publ148/pdf/PLAW-111publ148.pdf

Preparation, Submission and Execution      http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/asse     OMB Circular A-11
of the Budget                              ts/a11_current_year/a_11_2011.pdf

Privacy Act of 1974                        http://dpclo.defense.gov/privacy/documents/pa1974.pdf      P.L. 93-579




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 230
                                                                                                         OTHER INFORMATION




Prompt Payment Act Amended as of            http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?hl=false&edition=pr    P.L. 100-496 or
1998                                        elim&req=granuleid%3AUSC-prelim-title31-                  31 U.S.C. Ch 39
                                            chapter39&f=treesort&num=0&saved=%7CKHRpdGxlOjM
                                            xIGNoYXB0ZXI6MzkgZWRpdGlvbjpwcmVsaW0pIE9SIChnc
                                            mFudWxlaWQ6VVNDLXByZWxpbS10aXRsZTMxLWNoYXB0
                                            ZXIzOSk%3D%7CdHJlZXNvcnQ%3D%7C%7C0%7Cfalse%7C
                                            prelim

Public Health Service Act                   http://www.ssa.gov/OP_Home/comp2/F078-410.html            P.L. 78-410 or
                                                                                                      42 U.S.C. Ch 6A

Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1998       http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                        P.L. 106-246 §2403
(Workforce Investment Act)                  106publ246/pdf/PLAW-106publ246.pdf

Reports Consolidation Act of 2000           http://www.dol.gov/ocfo/media/regs/RCA.pdf                P.L. 106-531

Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002                  http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                        P.L. 107-204
                                            107publ204/pdf/PLAW-107publ204.pdf

Self Employment Contributions Act           http://uscodebeta.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=%22self+e      26 U.S.C. Ch 2
(SECA) of 1954 (§1401 through §1403)        mployment+contributions+act%22&f=treesort&fq=true&n
                                            um=0&hl=true&edition=prelim&granuleId=USC-prelim-
                                            title26-section1403

Small Business Jobs Act of 2010             http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                        P.L. 111-240
                                            111publ240/pdf/PLAW-111publ240.pdf

Small Business Jobs Act of 2010, U.S.       http://www.sba.gov/content/small-business-jobs-act-       P.L. 111-240
Small Business Administration Initiatives   2010

Social Security Act of 1935, as amended     http://library.clerk.house.gov/reference-                 P.L. 74-271
                                            files/PPL_SocialSecurity.pdf

Tax Increase Prevention and                 http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-                       P.L. 109-222
Reconciliation Act of 2005                  109hr4297enr/pdf/BILLS-109hr4297enr.pdf

Temporary Payroll Tax Cut Continuation      http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                        P.L. 112-78
Act of 2011                                 112publ78/pdf/PLAW-112publ78.pdf

Native American $1 Coin Act                 http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-                        P.L. 110-82
                                            110publ82/pdf/PLAW-110publ82.pdf




 Department of Health and Human Services                                                  FY 2013 Agency Financial Report 231
                                          OTHER ACCOMPANYING INFORMATION




DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
 200 Independence Ave, S.W. ● Washington, DC 20201
           877.696.6775 ● www.hhs.gov
